text
statistics is the discipline that concerns the collection, organization, analysis, interpretation, and presentation of data. in applying statistics to a scientific, industrial, or social problem, it is conventional to begin with a statistical population or a statistical model to be studied. populations can be diverse groups of people or objects such as "all people living in a country" or "every atom composing a crystal". statistics deals with every aspect of data, including the planning of data collection in terms of the design of surveys and experiments. when census data cannot be collected, statisticians collect data by developing specific experiment designs and survey samples. representative sampling assures that inferences and conclusions can reasonably extend from the sample to the population as a whole. an experimental study involves taking measurements of the system under study, manipulating the system, and then taking additional measurements using the same procedure to determine if the manipulation has modified the values of the measurements. in contrast, an observational study does not involve experimental manipulation. two main statistical methods are used in data analysis: descriptive statistics, which summarize data from a sample using indexes such as the mean or standard deviation, and inferential statistics, which draw conclusions from data that are subject to random variation (e.g., observational errors, sampling variation). descriptive statistics are most often concerned with two sets of properties of a distribution (sample or population): central tendency (or location) seeks to characterize the distribution's central or typical value, while dispersion (or variability) characterizes the extent to which members of the distribution depart from its center and each other. inferences on mathematical statistics are made under the framework of probability theory, which deals with the analysis of random phenomena. a standard statistical procedure involves the collection of data leading to test of the relationship between two statistical data sets, or a data set and synthetic data drawn from an idealized model. a hypothesis is proposed for the statistical relationship between the two data sets, and this is compared as an alternative to an idealized null hypothesis of no relationship between two data sets. rejecting or disproving the null hypothesis is done using statistical tests that quantify the sense in which the null can be proven false, given the data that are used in the test. working from a null hypothesis, two basic forms of error are recognized: type i errors (null hypothesis is falsely rejected giving a "false positive") and type ii errors (null hypothesis fails to be rejected and an actual relationship between populations is missed giving a "false negative"). multiple problems have come to be associated with this framework, ranging from obtaining a sufficient sample size to specifying an adequate null hypothesis. measurement processes that generate statistical data are also subject to error. many of these errors are classified as random (noise) or systematic (bias), but other types of errors (e.g., blunder, such as when an analyst reports incorrect units) can also occur. the presence of missing data or censoring may result in biased estimates and specific techniques have been developed to address these problems. statistics is a mathematical body of science that pertains to the collection, analysis, interpretation or explanation, and presentation of data, or as a branch of mathematics. some consider statistics to be a distinct mathematical science rather than a branch of mathematics. while many scientific investigations make use of data, statistics is concerned with the use of data in the context of uncertainty and decision making in the face of uncertainty. in applying statistics to a problem, it is common practice to start with a population or process to be studied. populations can be diverse topics such as "all people living in a country" or "every atom composing a crystal". ideally, statisticians compile data about the entire population (an operation called census). this may be organized by governmental statistical institutes. descriptive statistics can be used to summarize the population data. numerical descriptors include mean and standard deviation for continuous data (like income), while frequency and percentage are more useful in terms of describing categorical data (like education). when a census is not feasible, a chosen subset of the population called a sample is studied. once a sample that is representative of the population is determined, data is collected for the sample members in an observational or experimental setting. again, descriptive statistics can be used to summarize the sample data. however, drawing the sample contains an element of randomness; hence, the numerical descriptors from the sample are also prone to uncertainty. to draw meaningful conclusions about the entire population, inferential statistics is needed. it uses patterns in the sample data to draw inferences about the population represented while accounting for randomness. these inferences may take the form of answering yes/no questions about the data (hypothesis testing), estimating numerical characteristics of the data (estimation), describing associations within the data (correlation), and modeling relationships within the data (for example, using regression analysis). inference can extend to forecasting, prediction, and estimation of unobserved values either in or associated with the population being studied. it can include extrapolation and interpolation of time series or spatial data, and data mining. mathematical statistics is the application of mathematics to statistics. mathematical techniques used for this include mathematical analysis, linear algebra, stochastic analysis, differential equations, and measure-theoretic probability theory. the early writings on statistical inference date back to arab mathematicians and cryptographers, during the islamic golden age between the th and th centuries. al-khalil ( – ) wrote the book of cryptographic messages, which contains the first use of permutations and combinations, to list all possible arabic words with and without vowels. in his book, manuscript on deciphering cryptographic messages, al-kindi gave a detailed description of how to use frequency analysis to decipher encrypted messages. al-kindi also made the earliest known use of statistical inference, while he and later arab cryptographers developed the early statistical methods for decoding encrypted messages. ibn adlan ( – ) later made an important contribution, on the use of sample size in frequency analysis. the earliest european writing on statistics dates back to , with the publication of natural and political observations upon the bills of mortality by john graunt. early applications of statistical thinking revolved around the needs of states to base policy on demographic and economic data, hence its stat- etymology. the scope of the discipline of statistics broadened in the early th century to include the collection and analysis of data in general. 

today, statistics is widely employed in government, business, and natural and social sciences. the mathematical foundations of modern statistics were laid in the th century with the development of the probability theory by gerolamo cardano, blaise pascal and pierre de fermat. mathematical probability theory arose from the study of games of chance, although the concept of probability was already examined in medieval law and by philosophers such as juan caramuel. the method of least squares was first described by adrien-marie legendre in . the modern field of statistics emerged in the late th and early th century in three stages. the first wave, at the turn of the century, was led by the work of francis galton and karl pearson, who transformed statistics into a rigorous mathematical discipline used for analysis, not just in science, but in industry and politics as well. galton's contributions included introducing the concepts of standard deviation, correlation, regression analysis and the application of these methods to the study of the variety of human characteristics—height, weight, eyelash length among others. pearson developed the pearson product-moment correlation coefficient, defined as a product-moment, the method of moments for the fitting of distributions to samples and the pearson distribution, among many other things. galton and pearson founded biometrika as the first journal of mathematical statistics and biostatistics (then called biometry), and the latter founded the world's first university statistics department at university college london. ronald fisher coined the term null hypothesis during the lady tasting tea experiment, which "is never proved or established, but is possibly disproved, in the course of experimentation". the second wave of the s and s was initiated by william sealy gosset, and reached its culmination in the insights of ronald fisher, who wrote the textbooks that were to define the academic discipline in universities around the world. fisher's most important publications were his seminal paper the correlation between relatives on the supposition of mendelian inheritance (which was the first to use the statistical term, variance), his classic work statistical methods for research workers and his the design of experiments, where he developed rigorous design of experiments models. he originated the concepts of sufficiency, ancillary statistics, fisher's linear discriminator and fisher information. in his book the genetical theory of natural selection, he applied statistics to various biological concepts such as fisher's principle (which a. w. f. edwards called "probably the most celebrated argument in evolutionary biology") and fisherian runaway, a concept in sexual selection about a positive feedback runaway affect found in evolution. the final wave, which mainly saw the refinement and expansion of earlier developments, emerged from the collaborative work between egon pearson and jerzy neyman in the s. they introduced the concepts of "type ii" error, power of a test and confidence intervals. jerzy neyman in showed that stratified random sampling was in general a better method of estimation than purposive (quota) sampling. today, statistical methods are applied in all fields that involve decision making, for making accurate inferences from a collated body of data and for making decisions in the face of uncertainty based on statistical methodology. the use of modern computers has expedited large-scale statistical computations and has also made possible new methods that are impractical to perform manually. statistics continues to be an area of active research for example on the problem of how to analyze big data. when full census data cannot be collected, statisticians collect sample data by developing specific experiment designs and survey samples. statistics itself also provides tools for prediction and forecasting through statistical models. to use a sample as a guide to an entire population, it is important that it truly represents the overall population. representative sampling assures that inferences and conclusions can safely extend from the sample to the population as a whole. a major problem lies in determining the extent that the sample chosen is actually representative. statistics offers methods to estimate and correct for any bias within the sample and data collection procedures. there are also methods of experimental design for experiments that can lessen these issues at the outset of a study, strengthening its capability to discern truths about the population.

 sampling theory is part of the mathematical discipline of probability theory. probability is used in mathematical statistics to study the sampling distributions of sample statistics and, more generally, the properties of statistical procedures. the use of any statistical method is valid when the system or population under consideration satisfies the assumptions of the method. the difference in point of view between classic probability theory and sampling theory is, roughly, that probability theory starts from the given parameters of a total population to deduce probabilities that pertain to samples. statistical inference, however, moves in the opposite direction—inductively inferring from samples to the parameters of a larger or total population. a common goal for a statistical research project is to investigate causality, and in particular to draw a conclusion on the effect of changes in the values of predictors or independent variables on dependent variables. there are two major types of causal statistical studies: experimental studies and observational studies. in both types of studies, the effect of differences of an independent variable (or variables) on the behavior of the dependent variable are observed. the difference between the two types lies in how the study is actually conducted. each can be very effective. an experimental study involves taking measurements of the system under study, manipulating the system, and then taking additional measurements using the same procedure to determine if the manipulation has modified the values of the measurements. in contrast, an observational study does not involve experimental manipulation. instead, data are gathered and correlations between predictors and response are investigated. while the tools of data analysis work best on data from randomized studies, they are also applied to other kinds of data—like natural experiments and observational studies —for which a statistician would use a modified, more structured estimation method (e.g., difference in differences estimation and instrumental variables, among many others) that produce consistent estimators. the basic steps of a statistical experiment are: experiments on human behavior have special concerns. the famous hawthorne study examined changes to the working environment at the hawthorne plant of the western electric company. the researchers were interested in determining whether increased illumination would increase the productivity of the assembly line workers. the researchers first measured the productivity in the plant, then modified the illumination in an area of the plant and checked if the changes in illumination affected productivity. it turned out that productivity indeed improved (under the experimental conditions). however, the study is heavily criticized today for errors in experimental procedures, specifically for the lack of a control group and blindness. the hawthorne effect refers to finding that an outcome (in this case, worker productivity) changed due to observation itself. those in the hawthorne study became more productive not because the lighting was changed but because they were being observed. an example of an observational study is one that explores the association between smoking and lung cancer. this type of study typically uses a survey to collect observations about the area of interest and then performs statistical analysis. in this case, the researchers would collect observations of both smokers and non-smokers, perhaps through a cohort study, and then look for the number of cases of lung cancer in each group. a case-control study is another type of observational study in which people with and without the outcome of interest (e.g. lung cancer) are invited to participate and their exposure histories are collected. various attempts have been made to produce a taxonomy of levels of measurement. the psychophysicist stanley smith stevens defined nominal, ordinal, interval, and ratio scales. nominal measurements do not have meaningful rank order among values, and permit any one-to-one (injective) transformation. ordinal measurements have imprecise differences between consecutive values, but have a meaningful order to those values, and permit any order-preserving transformation. interval measurements have meaningful distances between measurements defined, but the zero value is arbitrary (as in the case with longitude and temperature measurements in celsius or fahrenheit), and permit any linear transformation. ratio measurements have both a meaningful zero value and the distances between different measurements defined, and permit any rescaling transformation. because variables conforming only to nominal or ordinal measurements cannot be reasonably measured numerically, sometimes they are grouped together as categorical variables, whereas ratio and interval measurements are grouped together as quantitative variables, which can be either discrete or continuous, due to their numerical nature. such distinctions can often be loosely correlated with data type in computer science, in that dichotomous categorical variables may be represented with the boolean data type, polytomous categorical variables with arbitrarily assigned integers in the integral data type, and continuous variables with the real data type involving floating point computation. but the mapping of computer science data types to statistical data types depends on which categorization of the latter is being implemented. other categorizations have been proposed. for example, mosteller and tukey ( ) distinguished grades, ranks, counted fractions, counts, amounts, and balances. nelder ( ) described continuous counts, continuous ratios, count ratios, and categorical modes of data. (see also: chrisman ( ), van den berg ( ). ) the issue of whether or not it is appropriate to apply different kinds of statistical methods to data obtained from different kinds of measurement procedures is complicated by issues concerning the transformation of variables and the precise interpretation of research questions. "the relationship between the data and what they describe merely reflects the fact that certain kinds of statistical statements may have truth values which are not invariant under some transformations. whether or not a transformation is sensible to contemplate depends on the question one is trying to answer." : a descriptive statistic (in the count noun sense) is a summary statistic that quantitatively describes or summarizes features of a collection of information, while descriptive statistics in the mass noun sense is the process of using and analyzing those statistics. descriptive statistics is distinguished from inferential statistics (or inductive statistics), in that descriptive statistics aims to summarize a sample, rather than use the data to learn about the population that the sample of data is thought to represent. statistical inference is the process of using data analysis to deduce properties of an underlying probability distribution. inferential statistical analysis infers properties of a population, for example by testing hypotheses and deriving estimates. it is assumed that the observed data set is sampled from a larger population. inferential statistics can be contrasted with descriptive statistics. descriptive statistics is solely concerned with properties of the observed data, and it does not rest on the assumption that the data come from a larger population. consider independent identically distributed (iid) random variables with a given probability distribution: standard statistical inference and estimation theory defines a random sample as the random vector given by the column vector of these iid variables. the population being examined is described by a probability distribution that may have unknown parameters. 

a statistic is a random variable that is a function of the random sample, but not a function of unknown parameters. the probability distribution of the statistic, though, may have unknown parameters. consider now a function of the unknown parameter: an estimator is a statistic used to estimate such function. commonly used estimators include sample mean, unbiased sample variance and sample covariance. a random variable that is a function of the random sample and of the unknown parameter, but whose probability distribution does not depend on the unknown parameter is called a pivotal quantity or pivot. widely used pivots include the z-score, the chi square statistic and student's t-value. between two estimators of a given parameter, the one with lower mean squared error is said to be more efficient. furthermore, an estimator is said to be unbiased if its expected value is equal to the true value of the unknown parameter being estimated, and asymptotically unbiased if its expected value converges at the limit to the true value of such parameter. other desirable properties for estimators include: umvue estimators that have the lowest variance for all possible values of the parameter to be estimated (this is usually an easier property to verify than efficiency) and consistent estimators which converges in probability to the true value of such parameter. this still leaves the question of how to obtain estimators in a given situation and carry the computation, several methods have been proposed: the method of moments, the maximum likelihood method, the least squares method and the more recent method of estimating equations. interpretation of statistical information can often involve the development of a null hypothesis which is usually (but not necessarily) that no relationship exists among variables or that no change occurred over time. the best illustration for a novice is the predicament encountered by a criminal trial. the null hypothesis, h , asserts that the defendant is innocent, whereas the alternative hypothesis, h , asserts that the defendant is guilty. the indictment comes because of suspicion of the guilt. the h (status quo) stands in opposition to h and is maintained unless h is supported by evidence "beyond a reasonable doubt". however, "failure to reject h " in this case does not imply innocence, but merely that the evidence was insufficient to convict. so the jury does not necessarily accept h but fails to reject h . while one can not "prove" a null hypothesis, one can test how close it is to being true with a power test, which tests for type ii errors. what statisticians call an alternative hypothesis is simply a hypothesis that contradicts the null hypothesis. working from a null hypothesis, two broad categories of error are recognized: standard deviation refers to the extent to which individual observations in a sample differ from a central value, such as the sample or population mean, while standard error refers to an estimate of difference between sample mean and population mean. a statistical error is the amount by which an observation differs from its expected value, a residual is the amount an observation differs from the value the estimator of the expected value assumes on a given sample (also called prediction). mean squared error is used for obtaining efficient estimators, a widely used class of estimators. root mean square error is simply the square root of mean squared error. many statistical methods seek to minimize the residual sum of squares, and these are called "methods of least squares" in contrast to least absolute deviations. the latter gives equal weight to small and big errors, while the former gives more weight to large errors. residual sum of squares is also differentiable, which provides a handy property for doing regression. least squares applied to linear regression is called ordinary least squares method and least squares applied to nonlinear regression is called non-linear least squares. also in a linear regression model the non deterministic part of the model is called error term, disturbance or more simply noise. both linear regression and non-linear regression are addressed in polynomial least squares, which also describes the variance in a prediction of the dependent variable (y axis) as a function of the independent variable (x axis) and the deviations (errors, noise, disturbances) from the estimated (fitted) curve. measurement processes that generate statistical data are also subject to error. many of these errors are classified as random (noise) or systematic (bias), but other types of errors (e.g., blunder, such as when an analyst reports incorrect units) can also be important. the presence of missing data or censoring may result in biased estimates and specific techniques have been developed to address these problems. most studies only sample part of a population, so results don't fully represent the whole population. any estimates obtained from the sample only approximate the population value. confidence intervals allow statisticians to express how closely the sample estimate matches the true value in the whole population. often they are expressed as % confidence intervals. formally, a % confidence interval for a value is a range where, if the sampling and analysis were repeated under the same conditions (yielding a different dataset), the interval would include the true (population) value in % of all possible cases. this does not imply that the probability that the true value is in the confidence interval is %. from the frequentist perspective, such a claim does not even make sense, as the true value is not a random variable. either the true value is or is not within the given interval. however, it is true that, before any data are sampled and given a plan for how to construct the confidence interval, the probability is % that the yet-to-be-calculated interval will cover the true value: at this point, the limits of the interval are yet-to-be-observed random variables. one approach that does yield an interval that can be interpreted as having a given probability of containing the true value is to use a credible interval from bayesian statistics: this approach depends on a different way of interpreting what is meant by "probability", that is as a bayesian probability. in principle confidence intervals can be symmetrical or asymmetrical. an interval can be asymmetrical because it works as lower or upper bound for a parameter (left-sided interval or right sided interval), but it can also be asymmetrical because the two sided interval is built violating symmetry around the estimate. sometimes the bounds for a confidence interval are reached asymptotically and these are used to approximate the true bounds. statistics rarely give a simple yes/no type answer to the question under analysis. interpretation often comes down to the level of statistical significance applied to the numbers and often refers to the probability of a value accurately rejecting the null hypothesis (sometimes referred to as the p-value). the standard approach is to test a null hypothesis against an alternative hypothesis. 

a critical region is the set of values of the estimator that leads to refuting the null hypothesis. the probability of type i error is therefore the probability that the estimator belongs to the critical region given that null hypothesis is true (statistical significance) and the probability of type ii error is the probability that the estimator doesn't belong to the critical region given that the alternative hypothesis is true. the statistical power of a test is the probability that it correctly rejects the null hypothesis when the null hypothesis is false. referring to statistical significance does not necessarily mean that the overall result is significant in real world terms. for example, in a large study of a drug it may be shown that the drug has a statistically significant but very small beneficial effect, such that the drug is unlikely to help the patient noticeably. although in principle the acceptable level of statistical significance may be subject to debate, the significance level is the largest p-value that allows the test to reject the null hypothesis. this test is logically equivalent to saying that the p-value is the probability, assuming the null hypothesis is true, of observing a result at least as extreme as the test statistic. therefore, the smaller the significance level, the lower the probability of committing type i error. some problems are usually associated with this framework (see criticism of hypothesis testing): some well-known statistical tests and procedures are: exploratory data analysis (eda) is an approach to analyzing data sets to summarize their main characteristics, often with visual methods. a statistical model can be used or not, but primarily eda is for seeing what the data can tell us beyond the formal modeling or hypothesis testing task. misuse of statistics can produce subtle but serious errors in description and interpretation—subtle in the sense that even experienced professionals make such errors, and serious in the sense that they can lead to devastating decision errors. for instance, social policy, medical practice, and the reliability of structures like bridges all rely on the proper use of statistics. even when statistical techniques are correctly applied, the results can be difficult to interpret for those lacking expertise. the statistical significance of a trend in the data—which measures the extent to which a trend could be caused by random variation in the sample—may or may not agree with an intuitive sense of its significance. the set of basic statistical skills (and skepticism) that people need to deal with information in their everyday lives properly is referred to as statistical literacy. there is a general perception that statistical knowledge is all-too-frequently intentionally misused by finding ways to interpret only the data that are favorable to the presenter. a mistrust and misunderstanding of statistics is associated with the quotation, "there are three kinds of lies: lies, damned lies, and statistics". misuse of statistics can be both inadvertent and intentional, and the book how to lie with statistics outlines a range of considerations. in an attempt to shed light on the use and misuse of statistics, reviews of statistical techniques used in particular fields are conducted (e.g. warne, lazo, ramos, and ritter ( )). ways to avoid misuse of statistics include using proper diagrams and avoiding bias. misuse can occur when conclusions are overgeneralized and claimed to be representative of more than they really are, often by either deliberately or unconsciously overlooking sampling bias. bar graphs are arguably the easiest diagrams to use and understand, and they can be made either by hand or with simple computer programs. unfortunately, most people do not look for bias or errors, so they are not noticed. thus, people may often believe that something is true even if it is not well represented. to make data gathered from statistics believable and accurate, the sample taken must be representative of the whole. according to huff, "the dependability of a sample can be destroyed by [bias]... allow yourself some degree of skepticism." to assist in the understanding of statistics huff proposed a series of questions to be asked in each case: the concept of correlation is particularly noteworthy for the potential confusion it can cause. statistical analysis of a data set often reveals that two variables (properties) of the population under consideration tend to vary together, as if they were connected. for example, a study of annual income that also looks at age of death might find that poor people tend to have shorter lives than affluent people. the two variables are said to be correlated; however, they may or may not be the cause of one another. the correlation phenomena could be caused by a third, previously unconsidered phenomenon, called a lurking variable or confounding variable. for this reason, there is no way to immediately infer the existence of a causal relationship between the two variables.

 applied statistics comprises descriptive statistics and the application of inferential statistics. theoretical statistics concerns the logical arguments underlying justification of approaches to statistical inference, as well as encompassing mathematical statistics. mathematical statistics includes not only the manipulation of probability distributions necessary for deriving results related to methods of estimation and inference, but also various aspects of computational statistics and the design of experiments. statistical consultants can help organizations and companies that don't have in-house expertise relevant to their particular questions. machine learning models are statistical and probabilistic models that capture patterns in the data through use of computational algorithms. statistics is applicable to a wide variety of academic disciplines, including natural and social sciences, government, and business. business statistics applies statistical methods in econometrics, auditing and production and operations, including services improvement and marketing research. a study of two journals in tropical biology found that the most frequent statistical tests are: analysis of variance (anova), chi-square test, student’s t test, linear regression, pearson’s correlation coefficient, mann-whitney u test, kruskal-wallis test, shannon’s diversity index, tukey's test, cluster analysis, spearman’s rank correlation test and principal component analysis. a typical statistics course covers descriptive statistics, probability, binomial and normal distributions, test of hypotheses and confidence intervals, linear regression, and correlation. modern fundamental statistical courses for undergraduate students focus on correct test selection, results interpretation, and use of free statistics software. the rapid and sustained increases in computing power starting from the second half of the th century have had a substantial impact on the practice of statistical science. early statistical models were almost always from the class of linear models, but powerful computers, coupled with suitable numerical algorithms, caused an increased interest in nonlinear models (such as neural networks) as well as the creation of new types, such as generalized linear models and multilevel models. increased computing power has also led to the growing popularity of computationally intensive methods based on resampling, such as permutation tests and the bootstrap, while techniques such as gibbs sampling have made use of bayesian models more feasible. the computer revolution has implications for the future of statistics with a new emphasis on "experimental" and "empirical" statistics. a large number of both general and special purpose statistical software are now available. examples of available software capable of complex statistical computation include programs such as mathematica, sas, spss, and r. in business, "statistics" is a widely used management- and decision support tool. it is particularly applied in financial management, marketing management, and production, services and operations management .

 statistics is also heavily used in management accounting and auditing. the discipline of management science formalizes the use of statistics, and other mathematics, in business. (econometrics is the application of statistical methods to economic data in order to give empirical content to economic relationships.) a typical "business statistics" course is intended for business majors, and covers descriptive statistics (collection, description, analysis, and summary of data), probability (typically the binomial and normal distributions), test of hypotheses and confidence intervals, linear regression, and correlation; (follow-on) courses may include forecasting, time series, decision trees, multiple linear regression, and other topics from business analytics more generally. see also business mathematics § university level. professional certification programs, such as the cfa, often include topics in statistics. traditionally, statistics was concerned with drawing inferences using a semi-standardized methodology that was "required learning" in most sciences.[citation needed] this tradition has changed with the use of statistics in non-inferential contexts. what was once considered a dry subject, taken in many fields as a degree-requirement, is now viewed enthusiastically.[according to whom?] initially derided by some mathematical purists, it is now considered essential methodology in certain areas. statistical techniques are used in a wide range of types of scientific and social research, including: biostatistics, computational biology, computational sociology, network biology, social science, sociology and social research. some fields of inquiry use applied statistics so extensively that they have specialized terminology. these disciplines include: in addition, there are particular types of statistical analysis that have also developed their own specialised terminology and methodology: statistics form a key basis tool in business and manufacturing as well. it is used to understand measurement systems variability, control processes (as in statistical process control or spc), for summarizing data, and to make data-driven decisions. in these roles, it is a key tool, and perhaps the only reliable tool. 

social media are interactive technologies that allow the creation or sharing/exchange of information, ideas, career interests, and other forms of expression via virtual communities and networks. while challenges to the definition of social media arise due to the broad variety of stand-alone and built-in social-media services currently available, there are some common features: users usually access social media services via web-based apps on desktops and laptops, or download services that offer social media functionality to their mobile devices (e.g., smartphones and tablets). as users engage with these electronic services, they create highly interactive platforms through which individuals, communities, and organizations can share, co-create, discuss, participate, and modify user-generated content or self-curated content posted online. additionally, social media are used to document memories; learn about and explore things; advertise oneself; and form friendships along with the growth of ideas from the creation of blogs, podcasts, videos, and gaming sites. this changing relationship between human and technology is the focus of the emerging field of technoself studies. some of the most popular social media websites, with over million registered users, include facebook (and its associated facebook messenger), tiktok, wechat, instagram, qzone, weibo, twitter, tumblr, baidu tieba, and linkedin. depending on interpretation, other popular platforms that are sometimes referred to as social media services include: youtube, qq, quora, telegram, whatsapp, line, snapchat, pinterest, viber, reddit, discord, vk, microsoft teams, and more. wikis are examples of collaborative content creation. social media outlets differ from traditional media (e.g., print magazines and newspapers, and tv and radio broadcasting) in a variety of ways, including quality, reach, frequency, usability, immediacy, and permanence. additionally, social media outlets operate in a dialogic transmission system, i.e., many sources to many receivers, while traditional media outlets operate under a monologic transmission model (i.e., one source to many receivers). for instance, a newspaper is delivered to many subscribers and a radio station broadcasts the same programs to an entire city. since the dramatic expansion of the internet, digital media or digital rhetoric can be used to represent or identify a culture. studying how the rhetoric that exists in the digital environment has become a crucial new process for many scholars. observers have noted a wide range of positive and negative impacts of social media use. social media can help to improve an individual's sense of connectedness with real or online communities and can be an effective communication (or marketing) tool for corporations, entrepreneurs, non-profit organizations, advocacy groups, political parties, and governments. observers have also seen that there has been a rise in social movements using social media as a tool for communicating and organizing in times of political unrest. the plato system launched in , after being developed at the university of illinois and subsequently commercially marketed by control data corporation. it offered early forms of social media features with -era innovations such as notes, plato's message-forum application; term-talk, its instant-messaging feature; talkomatic, perhaps the first online chat room; news report, a crowdsourced online newspaper, and blog; and access lists, enabling the owner of a note file or other application to limit access to a certain set of users, for example, only friends, classmates, or co-workers. arpanet, which first came online in , had by the late- s developed a rich cultural exchange of non-government/business ideas and communication, as evidenced by the network etiquette (or 'netiquette') described in a handbook on computing at mit's artificial intelligence laboratory. arpanet evolved into the internet following the publication of the first transmission control protocol (tcp) specification, rfc (specification of internet transmission control program), written by vint cerf, yogen dalal and carl sunshine in . this became the foundation of usenet, conceived by tom truscott and jim ellis in at the university of north carolina at chapel hill and duke university, and established in . a precursor of the electronic bulletin board system (bbs), known as community memory, had already appeared by . true electronic bbss arrived with the computer bulletin board system in chicago, which first came online on february , . before long, most major cities had more than one bbs running on trs- , apple ii, atari, ibm pc, commodore , sinclair, and similar personal computers. the ibm pc was introduced in , and subsequent models of both mac computers and pcs were used throughout the s. multiple modems, followed by specialized telecommunication hardware, allowed many users to be online simultaneously. compuserve, prodigy and aol were three of the largest bbs companies and were the first to migrate to the internet in the s. between the mid- s and the mid- s, bbses numbered in the tens of thousands in north america alone. message forums (a specific structure of social media) arose with the bbs phenomenon throughout the s and early s. when the world wide web (www, or 'the web') was added to the internet in the mid- s, message forums migrated to the web, becoming internet forums, primarily due to cheaper per-person access as well as the ability to handle far more people simultaneously than telco modem banks. digital imaging and semiconductor image sensor technology facilitated the development and rise of social media. advances in metal-oxide-semiconductor (mos) semiconductor device fabrication, reaching smaller micron and then sub-micron levels during the s– s, led to the development of the nmos (n-type mos) active-pixel sensor (aps) at olympus in , and then the complementary mos (cmos) active-pixel sensor (cmos sensor) at nasa's jet propulsion laboratory (jpl) in . cmos sensors enabled the mass proliferation of digital cameras and camera phones, which bolstered the rise of social media. an important feature of social media is digital media data compression, due to the impractically high memory and bandwidth requirements of uncompressed media. the most important compression algorithm is the discrete cosine transform (dct), a lossy compression technique that was first proposed by nasir ahmed in . dct-based compression standards include the h. x and mpeg video coding standards introduced from onwards, and the jpeg image compression standard introduced in . jpeg was largely responsible for the proliferation of digital images and digital photos which lie at the heart of social media, and the mpeg standards did the same for digital video content on social media. the jpeg image format is used more than a billion times on social networks every day, as of . the development of social media began with simple platforms. geocities was one of the earliest social networking services, launched in november , followed by classmates.com in december and sixdegrees.com in may . unlike instant-messaging clients (e.g., icq and aol's aim) or chat clients (e.g., irc, ichat, or chat television), sixdegrees was the first online business that was created for real people, using their real names. as such, according to cbs news, sixdegrees is "widely considered to be the very first social networking site," as it included "profiles, friends lists and school affiliations" that could be used by registered users. research from shows that the world spent % of their online time on social networks, thus suggesting the popularity of social media platforms. it is speculated that the increase in social media's popularity is due to the widespread daily use of smartphones. the idea that social media are defined simply by their ability to bring people together has been seen as too broad, as this would suggest that fundamentally different technologies like the telegraph and telephone are also social media. the terminology is unclear, with some early researchers referring to social media as social networks or social networking services in the mid s. a more recent paper from reviewed the prominent literature in the area and identified four common features unique to then-current social media services: in , merriam-webster defined social media as "forms of electronic communication (such as websites for social networking and microblogging) through which users create online communities to share information, ideas, personal messages, and other content (such as videos)." while the variety of evolving stand-alone and built-in social media services makes it challenging to define them, marketing and social media experts broadly agree that social media include the following types of social media: mobile social media refer to the use of social media on mobile devices such as smartphones and tablet computers.

 mobile social media are a useful application of mobile marketing because the creation, exchange, and circulation of user-generated content can assist companies with marketing research, communication, and relationship development. mobile social media differ from others because they incorporate the current location of the user (location-sensitivity) or the time delay between sending and receiving messages (time-sensitivity). according to andreas kaplan, mobile social media applications can be differentiated among four types: some social media sites have the potential for content posted there to spread virally over social networks. the term is an analogy to the concept of viral infections, which can spread rapidly from individual to individual. in a social media context, content or websites that are 'viral' (or which 'go viral') are those with a greater likelihood that users will re-share content posted (by another user) to their social network, leading to further sharing. in some cases, posts containing popular content or fast-breaking news have been rapidly shared and re-shared by a huge number of users. businesses have a particular interest in viral marketing tactics because a viral campaign can achieve widespread advertising coverage (particularly if the viral reposting itself makes the news) for a fraction of the cost of a traditional marketing campaign, which typically uses printed materials, like newspapers, magazines, mailings, and billboards, and television and radio commercials. nonprofit organizations and activists may have similar interests in posting content on social media sites with the aim of it going viral. many social media sites provide specific functionality to help users re-share (also known as re-blogging) content, such as twitter's 'retweet' button, pinterest's 'pin' function, facebook's 'share' option, or tumblr's 're-blog' function. re-sharing (or, in this case, retweeting) is an especially popular component and feature of twitter, allowing its users to keep up with important events and stay connected with their peers, as well as contributing in various ways throughout social media. when certain posts become popular, they start to get retweeted over and over again, becoming viral. hashtags can be used in tweets, and can also be used to take count of how many people have used that hashtag. bots are automated programs that operate on the internet, which have grown in demand, due to their ability to automate many communication tasks, leading to the creation of a new industry of bot providers. chatbots and social bots are programmed to mimic natural human interactions such as liking, commenting, following, and unfollowing on social media platforms. as companies aim for greater market shares and increased audiences, internet bots have also been developed to facilitate social media marketing. with the existence of social bots and chatbots, however, the marketing industry has also met an analytical crisis, as these bots make it difficult to differentiate between human interactions and automated bot interactions. for instance, marketing data has been negatively affected by some bots, causing "digital cannibalism" in social media marketing. additionally, some bots violate the terms of use on many social media platforms such as instagram, which can result in profiles being taken down and banned. 'cyborgs'—either bot-assisted humans or human-assisted bots —are used for a number of different purposes both legitimate and illegitimate, from spreading fake news to creating marketing buzz. a common legitimate use includes using automated programs to post on social media at a specific time. in these cases, often the human writes the post content and the bot schedules the time of posting. in other cases, the cyborgs are more nefarious, e.g., contributing to the spread of fake news and misinformation. often these accounts blend human and bot activity in a strategic way, so that when an automated account is publicly identified, the human half of the cyborg is able to take over and could protest that the account has been used manually all along. in many cases, these accounts that are being used in a more illegitimate fashion try to pose as real people; in particular, the number of their friends or followers resemble that of a real person. cyborgs are also related to sock puppet accounts, where one human pretends to be someone else, but can also include one human operating multiple cyborg accounts. there has been rapid growth in the number of u.s. patent applications that cover new technologies related to social media, and the number of them that are published has been growing rapidly over the past five years.[citation needed] as of , there are over published patent applications in the us. as many as applications may be currently on file including those that haven't been published yet; however, only slightly over of these applications have issued as patents, largely due to the multi-year backlog in examination of business method patents, i.e., patents that outline and claim new methods of doing business. as an instance of technological convergence, various social media platforms of different kinds adapted functionality beyond their original scope, increasingly overlapping with each other over time, albeit usually not implemented as completely as on dedicated platforms. examples are the social hub site facebook launching an integrated video platform in may , and instagram, whose original scope was low-resolution photo sharing, introducing the ability to share quarter-minute × pixel videos in (later extended to a minute with increased resolution), acting like a minimal video platform without video seek bar. instagram later implemented stories (short videos self-destructing after hours), a concept popularized by snapchat, as well as igtv, for seekable videos of up to ten minutes or one hour depending on account status. stories have been later adapted by the dedicated video platform youtube in , although access is restricted to the mobile apps, excluding mobile and desktop websites. twitter, whose original scope was text-based microblogging, later adapted photo sharing functionality (deprecating third-party services such as twitpic), later video sharing with -second time limit and view counter but no manual quality selection or subtitles like on dedicated video platforms, and originally only available to mobile app users but later implemented in their website front ends. then a media studio feature for business users, which resembles youtube's creator studio. the discussion platform reddit added an integrated image hoster in june after reddit users commonly relied on the external standalone image sharing platform imgur, and an internal video hoster around a year later. in july , the ability to share multiple images in a single post (image galleries), a feature known from imgur, was implemented. imgur itself implemented sharing videos of up to seconds in may , later extended to one minute. starting in , the dedicated video platform youtube rolled out a community feature accessible through a channel tab (which usurps the previous discussion channel tab), where text-only posts, as well as polls can be shared. to be enabled, channels have to pass a subscriber count threshold which has been lowered over time. according to statista, it is estimated that, in , there are around . billion people using social media around the globe; up from . billion in . this number is expected to increase to . billion in . the following is a list of the most popular social networking services based on the number of active users as of january per statista. (in millions) according to a survey conducted by pew research in , facebook and youtube dominated the social media landscape, as notable majorities of u.s. adults used each of these sites. at the same time, younger americans (especially those ages to ) stood out for embracing a variety of platforms and using them frequently. some % of - -year-old adults used snapchat, with a sizable majority of these users ( %) visiting the platform multiple times per day. similarly, % of americans in this age group used instagram and close to half ( %) were twitter users. nonetheless, facebook remained the primary platform for most american adults: roughly two-thirds of u.s. adults ( %) reported that they were facebook users, and roughly three-quarters of those users accessed facebook on a daily basis. with the exception of those and older, a majority of americans across a wide range of demographic groups used facebook. however, after facebook's rapid growth in the united states over the years, the number of new u.s. facebook accounts created has plateaued, with not much observable growth in the - period. a study from suggests that there may be individual differences that help explain who uses social media and who does not: extraversion and openness have a positive relationship with social media, while emotional stability has a negative sloping relationship with social media. a separate study from found that people with a higher social comparison orientation appear to use social media more heavily than people with low social comparison orientation. data from common sense media has suggested that children under the age of in the united states use social networking services despite the fact that many social media sites have policies that state one must be at least -years-old or older to join. in , common sense media conducted a nationally representative survey of parents of children from birth to age and found that % of children at this age used social media sites such as instagram, snapchat, or (now-defunct) musical.ly “often” or “sometimes.” a different nationally representative survey by common sense in surveyed young americans ages – and found that about % of children ages – ever use social media such as snapchat, instagram, or facebook. in that same survey, when american teens ages – were asked when they started using social media, % said they started to use it before they were -years-old. however, the median age of starting to use social media was -years-old. in june , during the covid- pandemic, a nationally representative survey by cartoon network and the cyberbullying research center surveyed americans tweens (ages – ) found that the most popular overall application in the past year was youtube ( %). (in general, as age increased, the tweens were more likely to have used major social media apps and games.) similarly, a nationally representative survey by common sense media conducted in of americans ages – found that youtube was also the most popular social media service (used by % of - to -year-old americans in the past year). governments may use social media to (for example): social media has been used extensively in civil and criminal investigations. it has also been used to assist in searches for missing persons. police departments often make use of official social media accounts to engage with the public, publicize police activity, and burnish law enforcement's image; conversely, video footage of citizen-documented police brutality and other misconduct has sometimes been posted to social media. in the united states u.s. immigration and customs enforcement identifies and track individuals via social media, and also has apprehended some people via social media based sting operations. u.s. customs and border protection (also known as cpb) and the united states department of homeland security use social media data as influencing factors during the visa process, and continue to monitor individuals after they have entered the country. cpb officers have also been documented performing searches of electronics and social media behavior at the border, searching both citizens and non-citizens without first obtaining a warrant. as social media gained momentum among the younger generations, governments began using it to improve their image, especially among the youth. in january , egyptian authorities were found to be using instagram influencers as part of its media ambassadors program. the program was designed to revamp egypt’s image and to counter the bad press egypt had received because of the country's human rights record. saudi arabia and the united arab emirates participated in similar programs. similarly, dubai has also extensively relied on social media and influencers to promote tourism. however, the restrictive laws of dubai have always kept these influencers within the limits to not offend the authorities, or to criticize the city, politics or religion. the content of these foreign influencers is controlled to make sure that nothing portrays dubai in a negative light. the high distribution of social media in the private environment drives companies to deal with the application possibilities of social media on marketplace actors can use social media tools for marketing research, communication, sales promotions/discounts, informal employee-learning/organizational development, relationship development/loyalty programs, and e-commerce. often social media can become a good source of information and/or explanation of industry trends for a business to embrace change. trends in social-media technology and usage change rapidly, making it crucial for businesses to have a set of guidelines that can apply to many social media platforms. companies are increasingly[quantify] using social-media monitoring tools to monitor, track, and analyze online conversations on the web about their brand or products or about related topics of interest. this can prove useful in public relations management and advertising-campaign tracking, allowing analysts to measure return on investment for their social media ad spending, competitor-auditing, and for public engagement. tools range from free, basic applications to subscription-based, more in-depth tools. financial industries utilize the power of social media as a tool for analyzing the sentiment of financial markets. these range from the marketing of financial products, gaining insights into market sentiment, future market predictions, and as a tool to identify insider trading. social media become effective through a process called[by whom?] "building social authority". one of the foundation concepts in social media has become[when?] that one cannot completely control one's message through social media but rather one can simply begin to participate in the "conversation" expecting that one can achieve a significant influence in that conversation. social media marketing is the use of social media platforms and websites to promote a product or service and also to establish a connection with its customers. social media marketing has increased due to the growing active user rates on social media sites. for example, facebook currently has . billion users, twitter has million active users and instagram has million users. similar to traditional advertising, all of social media marketing can be divided into three types: ( ) paid media, ( ) earned media, and ( ) owned media. paid social media is when a firm directly buys advertising on a social media platform. earned social media is when the firms does something that impresses its consumers or other stakeholders and they spontaneously post their own content about it on social media. owned social media is when the firm itself owns the social media channel and creates content for its followers. one of the main uses is to interact with audiences to create awareness of the company or organization, with the main idea of creating a two-way communication system where the audience and/or customers can interact; e.g., customers can provide feedback on the firm's products. however, since social media allows consumers to spread opinions and share experiences in a peer-to-peer fashion, this has shifted some of the power from the organization to consumers, since these messages can be transparent and honest. social media can also be used to directly advertise; placing an advert on facebook's newsfeed, for example, can provide exposure of the brand to a large number of people. social media platforms also enable targeting specific audiences with advertising. users of social media are then able to like, share, and comment on the advert; this turns the passive advertising consumers into active advertising producers since they can pass the advert's message on to their friends. companies using social media marketing have to keep up with the different social media platforms and stay on top of ongoing trends. since the different platforms and trends attract different audiences, firms must be strategic about their use of social media to attract the right audience. moreover, the tone of the content can affect the efficacy of social media marketing. companies such as fast food franchise wendy's have used humor to advertise their products by poking fun at competitors such as mcdonald's and burger king. other companies such as juul have used hashtags to promote themselves and their products. social media personalities, often referred to as "influencers", have been employed by marketers to promote products online. research shows that digital endorsements seem to be successfully attracting social media users, especially younger consumers who have grown up in the digital age. in , the united kingdom advertising standards authority (asa) began to advise celebrities and sports stars to make it clear if they had been paid to tweet about a product or service by using the hashtag #spon or #ad within tweets containing endorsements, and the us federal trade commission has issued similar guidelines. the practice of harnessing social media personalities to market or promote a product or service to their following is commonly referred to as influencer marketing. the cambridge dictionary defines an "influencer" as any person (personality, blogger, journalist, celebrity) who has the ability to affect the opinions, behaviors, or purchases of others through the use of social media. marketing efforts can also take advantage of the peer effects in social media. consumers tend to treat content on social media differently from traditional advertising, but these messages may be part of an interactive marketing strategy involving modeling, reinforcement, and social interaction mechanisms. a study focused on this communication described how communication between peers through social media can affect purchase intentions: a direct impact through conformity, and an indirect impact by stressing product engagement. this study indicated that social media communication between peers about a product had a positive relationship with product engagement. social media have a range of uses in political processes and activities. social media have been championed[by whom?] as allowing anyone with access to an internet connection to become a content creator and as empowering users. [better source needed] the role of social media in democratizing media participation, which proponents herald as ushering in a new era of participatory democracy, with all users able to contribute news and comments, may fall short of the ideals, given that many often follow like-minded individuals, as noted by philip pond and jeff lewis. online-media audience-members are largely passive consumers, while content creation is dominated by a small number of users who post comments and write new content. : online engagement does not always translate into real-world action, and howard, busch and sheets have argued that there is a digital divide in north america because of the continent's history, culture, and geography. younger generations are becoming[when?] more involved in politics due to the increase of political news posted on social media.[citation needed] political campaigns are targeting millennials online via social-media posts in hope that they will increase their political engagement. social media was influential in the widespread attention given[by whom?] to the revolutionary outbreaks in the middle east and north africa during . during the tunisian revolution in , people used facebook to organize meetings and protests. however, debate persists about the extent to which social media facilitated this kind of political change. social-media footprints of candidates for political office have grown during the last decade[timeframe?] - the united states presidential election provided good examples. dounoucos et al. noted that twitter use by candidates was unprecedented during that election cycle. most candidates in the united states have a twitter account. the public has also increased their reliance on social-media sites for political information. in the european union, social media have amplified political messages. militant groups have begun[when?] to see social media as a major organizing and recruiting tool. the islamic state of iraq and the levant (also known as isil, isis, and daesh) has used social media to promote its cause. in , #alleyesonisis went viral on arabic twitter. isis produces an online magazine named the islamic state report to recruit more fighters. state-sponsored cyber-groups have weaponized social-media platforms to attack governments in the united states, the european union, and the middle east.[citation needed] although phishing attacks via email are the most commonly used tactic to breach government networks, phishing attacks on social media rose % in . increasing political influence on social media saw[when?] several campaigns running from one political side against another. often,[quantify] foreign-originated social-media campaigns have sought to influence political opinion in another country. for example, a twitter campaign run[when?] in saudi arabia produced thousands of tweets about hillary clinton's trending on #hillaryemails by supporters of mohammed bin salman. it also involved riyadh's social-marketing firm, smaat, which had a history of running such campaigns on twitter. politicians themselves use social media to their advantage - and to spread their campaign messages and to influence voters. due to the growing abuse of human rights in bahrain, activists have used social media to report acts of violence and injustice. they publicized the brutality of government authorities and police, who were detaining, torturing and threatening many individuals. on the other hand, bahrain's government was using social media to track and target rights activists and individuals who were critical of the authorities; the government has stripped citizenship from over , activists as punishment. some employers examine job applicants' social media profiles as part of the hiring assessment. this issue raises many ethical questions that some consider an employer's right and others consider discrimination. many western-european countries have already implemented laws that restrict the regulation of social media in the workplace. states including arkansas, california, colorado, illinois, maryland, michigan, nevada, new jersey, new mexico, utah, washington, and wisconsin have passed legislation that protects potential employees and current employees from employers that demand that they provide their usernames and/or passwords for any social media accounts. use of social media by young people has caused significant problems for some applicants who are active on social media when they try to enter the job market. a survey of , young people in six countries in found that in people aged to have been rejected for a job because of online comments they made on social media websites. for potential employees, using social media publicly may alter shape patterns of deception in resumes. [clarification needed] the use of social media in science communications offers extensive opportunities for exchanging scientific information, ideas, opinions and publications.

 scientists use social media to share their scientific knowledge and new findings on platforms such as researchgate, linkedin, facebook, twitter and academia.edu. among these the most common type of social media that scientists use is twitter and blogs. it has been found that twitter increased the scientific impact in the community. the use of social media has improved and elevated the interaction between scientists, reporters, and the general public.[citation needed] over , opinions were shared on twitter related to science in one year (between september , and august , ), which was an increase compared with past years. science related blogs motivate public interest in learning, following, and discussing science. blogs use textual depth and graphical videos that provide the reader with a dynamic way to interact with scientific information. both twitter and blogs can be written quickly and allow the reader to interact in real time with the authors. however, the popularity of social media platforms changes quickly and scientists need to keep pace with changes in social media. in terms of organized uses of scientific social media, one study in the context of climate change has shown that climate scientist and scientific institutions played a minimal role in online debate, while nongovernmental organizations played a larger role. signals from social media are used to assess academic publications, as well as for different scientific approaches.[clarification needed] another study found that most of the health science students acquiring academic materials from others through social media. it is not only an issue in the workplace but an issue in post-secondary school admissions as well. there have been situations where students have been forced to give up their social media passwords to school administrators. there are inadequate laws to protect a student's social media privacy, and organizations such as the aclu are pushing for more privacy protection, as it is an invasion. they urge students who are pressured to give up their account information to tell the administrators to contact a parent or lawyer before they take the matter any further. although they are students, they still have the right to keep their password-protected information private. before social media, admissions officials in the united states used sat and other standardized test scores, extra-curricular activities, letters of recommendation, and high school report cards to determine whether to accept or deny an applicant. in the s, while colleges and universities still use these traditional methods to evaluate applicants, these institutions are increasingly accessing applicants' social media profiles to learn about their character and activities. according to kaplan, inc, a corporation that provides higher education preparation, in % of admissions officers used google to learn more about an applicant, with % checking facebook. students whose social media pages include offensive jokes or photos, racist or homophobic comments, photos depicting the applicant engaging in illegal drug use or drunkenness, and so on, may be screened out from admission processes. social media comments and images are being used in a range of court cases including employment law, child custody/child support and insurance disability claims. after an apple employee criticized his employer on facebook, he was fired. when the former employee sued apple for unfair dismissal, the court, after seeing the man's facebook posts, found in favor of apple, as the man's social media comments breached apple's policies. after a heterosexual couple broke up, the man posted "violent rap lyrics from a song that talked about fantasies of killing the rapper's ex-wife" and made threats against him. the court found him guilty and he was sentenced to jail. in a disability claims case, a woman who fell at work claimed that she was permanently injured; the employer used the social media posts of her travels and activities to counter her claims. courts do not always admit social media evidence, in part, because screenshots can be faked or tampered with. judges are taking emojis into account to assess statements made on social media; in one michigan case where a person alleged that another person had defamed them in an online comment, the judge disagreed, noting that there was an emoji after the comment which indicated that it was a joke. in a case in ontario against a police officer regarding alleged assault of a protester during the g summit, the court rejected the crown's application to use a digital photo of the protest that was anonymously posted online, because there was no metadata proving when the photo was taken and it could have been digitally altered. in the united states, % of users look online for news of the weather, first and foremost, with the percentage seeking national news at %, % for sports news, and % for entertainment or celebrity news. according to cnn, in % of people got their news forwarded through e-mail or social media posts, whereas % of people shared a news item via facebook or twitter. facebook and twitter make news a more participatory experience than before as people share news articles and comment on other people's posts. rainie and wellman ( ) have argued that media making now has become a participation work, which changes communication systems. however, % of respondents worry about the accuracy of a story on a blog. from a poll, pew research center found that americans are wary about the ways that social media sites share news and certain content. this wariness of accuracy is on the rise as social media sites are increasingly exploited by aggregated new sources which stitch together multiple feeds to develop plausible correlations. hemsley and colleagues ( ) refer to this phenomenon as "pseudoknowledge" which develop false narratives and fake news that are supported through general analysis and ideology rather than facts. social media as a news source is further questioned as spikes in evidence surround major news events such as was captured in the united states presidential election. social media are used to fulfill perceived social needs such as socializing with friends and family as well as romance and flirting, but not all needs can be fulfilled by social media. for example, a article found that lonely individuals are more likely to use the internet for emotional support than those who are not lonely. a nationally representative survey from common sense media in found that % of american teens ages – thought that social media was “extremely” or “very” important for them to keep up with their friends on a day-to-basis. the same survey found that % of teens said social media was extremely or very important to have meaningful conversations with close friends, and % of teens said social media was extremely or very important to document and share highlights from their lives. recently, a gallup poll from may showed that % of adult social media users in the united states thought that social media was a very or moderately important way to keep in touch with those they cannot otherwise see in-person due to social distancing measures related to the covid- pandemic. sherry turkle explores this topic in her book alone together as she discusses how people confuse social media usage with authentic communication. she posits that people tend to act differently online and are less afraid to hurt each other's feelings. additionally, some online behaviors can cause stress and anxiety, due to the permanence of online posts, the fear of being hacked, or of universities and employers exploring social media pages. turkle also speculates that people are beginning to prefer texting to face-to-face communication, which can contribute to feelings of loneliness. nationally representative surveys from have found this to be the case with teens in the united states and mexico. some researchers have also found that exchanges that involved direct communication and reciprocation of messages correlated with fewer feelings of loneliness. however, that same study showed that passively using social media without sending or receiving messages does not make people feel less lonely unless they were lonely to begin with. the term social media "stalking" or "creeping" have been popularized over the years, and this refers to looking at the person's "timeline, status updates, tweets, and online bios" to find information about them and their activities. while social media creeping is common, it is considered to be poor form to admit to a new acquaintance or new date that you have looked through his or her social media posts, particularly older posts, as this will indicate that you were going through their old history. a sub-category of creeping is creeping ex-partners' social media posts after a breakup to investigate if there is a new partner or new dating; this can lead to preoccupation with the ex, rumination, and negative feelings, all of which postpone recovery and increase feelings of loss. catfishing has become more prevalent since the advent of social media. relationships formed with catfish can lead to actions such as supporting them with money and catfish will typically make excuses as to why they cannot meet up or be viewed on camera. the more time people spend on facebook, the less satisfied they feel about their life. self-presentation theory explains that people will consciously manage their self-image or identity related information in social contexts. in fact, a critical aspect of social networking sites is the time invested in customizing a personal profile, and encourage a sort of social currency based on likes, followers, and comments. users also tend to segment their audiences based on the image they want to present, pseudonymity and use of multiple accounts across the same platform remain popular ways to negotiate platform expectations and segment audiences. however, users may feel pressure to gain their peers' acceptance of their self-presentation. for example, in a peer-reviewed article by trudy hui hui chua and leanne chang, the authors found that teenage girls manipulate their self-presentation on social media to achieve a sense of beauty that is projected by their peers. these authors also discovered that teenage girls compare themselves to their peers on social media and present themselves in certain ways in an effort to earn regard and acceptance. however, when users do not feel like they reached this regard and acceptance, this can actually lead to problems with self-confidence and self-satisfaction. a nationally representative survey of american teens ages – by common sense media found that % said getting “likes” on posts is at least somewhat important, and % at least somewhat agreed that they feel bad about themselves is nobody comments on or “likes” their photos. some evidence suggests that perceived rejection may lead to feeling emotional pain, and some may partake in online retaliation such as online bullying. conversely, according to research from ucla, users' reward circuits in their brains are more active when their own photos are liked by more peers. literature suggests that social media can breed a negative feedback loop of viewing and uploading photos, self-comparison, feelings of disappointment when perceived social success is not achieved, and disordered body perception. in fact, one study shows that the microblogging platform, pinterest is directly associated with disordered dieting behavior, indicating that for those who frequently look at exercise or dieting "pins" there is a greater chance that they will engage in extreme weight-loss and dieting behavior. social media can also function as a supportive system for adolescents' health, because by using social media, adolescents are able to mobilize around health issues that they themselves deem relevant. for example, in a clinical study among adolescent patients undergoing treatment for obesity, the participants' expressed that through social media, they could find personalized weight-loss content as well as social support among other adolescents with obesity. whilst, social media can provide such information there are a considerable amount of uninformed and incorrect sources which promote unhealthy and dangerous methods of weight loss. as stated by the national eating disorder association there is a high correlation between weight loss content and disorderly eating among women who have been influenced by this negative content. therefore, there is a need for people to evaluate and identify reliable health information, competencies commonly known as health literacy. this has led to efforts by governments and public health organizations to use social media to interact with users, to limited success. other social media, such as pro-anorexia sites, have been found in studies to cause significant risk of harm by reinforcing negative health-related behaviors through social networking, especially in adolescents. social media effects the way a person views themselves. the constant comparison to edited photos, of other individual's and their living situations, ican cause many negative emotions. this can lead to not eating, and isolation. as more and more people continue to use social media for the wrong reasons, it increases the feeling of loneliness in adults. news media and television journalism have been a key feature in the shaping of american collective memory for much of the th century. indeed, since the colonial era of the united states, news media has influenced collective memory and discourse about national development and trauma. in many ways, mainstream journalists have maintained an authoritative voice as the storytellers of the american past. their documentary-style narratives, detailed exposés, and their positions in the present make them prime sources for public memory. specifically, news media journalists have shaped collective memory on nearly every major national event—from the deaths of social and political figures to the progression of political hopefuls. journalists provide elaborate descriptions of commemorative events in u.s. history and contemporary popular cultural sensations. many americans learn the significance of historical events and political issues through news media, as they are presented on popular news stations. however, journalistic influence has grown less important, whereas social networking sites such as facebook, youtube and twitter, provide a constant supply of alternative news sources for users. as social networking becomes more popular among older and younger generations, sites such as facebook and youtube gradually undermine the traditionally authoritative voices of news media. for example, american citizens contest media coverage of various social and political events as they see fit, inserting their voices into the narratives about america's past and present and shaping their own collective memories. an example of this is the public explosion of the trayvon martin shooting in sanford, florida. news media coverage of the incident was minimal until social media users made the story recognizable through their constant discussion of the case. approximately one month after martin's death, its online coverage by everyday americans garnered national attention from mainstream media journalists, in turn exemplifying media activism. in some ways, the spread of this tragic event through alternative news sources parallels that of emmett till—whose murder by lynching in became a national story after it was circulated in african-american and communist newspapers. social media use sometimes involves negative interactions between users. angry or emotional conversations can lead to real-world interactions, which can get users into dangerous situations. some users have experienced threats of violence online and have feared these threats manifesting themselves offline. related issues include cyberbullying, online harassment, and 'trolling'. according to cyberbullying statistics from the i-safe foundation, over half of adolescents and teens have been bullied online, and about the same number have engaged in cyberbullying. both the bully and the victim are negatively affected, and the intensity, duration, and frequency of bullying are the three aspects that increase the negative effects on both of them. one phenomenon that is commonly studied with social media is the issue of social comparison. people compare their own lives to the lives of their friends through their friends' posts.[citation needed] because people are motivated to portray themselves in a way that is appropriate to the situation and serves their best interests, often the things posted online are the positive aspects of people's lives, making other people question why their own lives are not as exciting or fulfilling. one study in found that problematic social media use (i.e., feeling addicted to social media) was related to lower life satisfaction and self-esteem scores; the authors speculate that users may feel if their life is not exciting enough to put online it is not as good as their friends or family. studies have shown that self-comparison on social media can have dire effects on physical and mental health because they give us the ability to seek approval and compare ourselves. in one study, women reported that social media are the most influential sources of their body image satisfaction; while men reported them as the second most impacting factor. social media has allowed for people to be constantly surrounded and aware of celebrity images and influencers who hold strong online presence with the number of followers they have. this constant online presence has meant that people are far more aware of what others look like and as such body comparisons have become an issue, as people are far more aware of what the desired body type is. a study produced by king university showed that % of women and % of men compared themselves to images found on social media. there are efforts to combat these negative effects, such as the use of the tag #instagramversusreality and #instagramversusreallife, that have been used to promote body positivity. in a related study, women aged – were shown posts using this hashtag that contained side-by-side images of women in the same clothes and setting, but one image was enhanced for instagram, while the other was an unedited, “realistic” version. women who participated in this experiment noted a decrease in body dissatisfaction. according to a study released in by researchers from the university of pittsburgh, the link between sleep disturbance and the use of social media was clear. it concluded that blue light had a part to play—and how often they logged on, rather than time spent on social media sites, was a higher predictor of disturbed sleep, suggesting "an obsessive 'checking'". the strong relationship of social media use and sleep disturbance has significant clinical ramifications for young adults health and well-being. in a recent study, we have learned that people in the highest quartile for social media use per week report the most sleep disturbance. the median number of minutes of social media use per day is minutes. lastly, we have learned that females are more inclined to experience high levels of sleep disturbance than males. many teenagers suffer from sleep deprivation as they spend long hours at night on their phones, and this, in turn, could affect grades as they will be tired and unfocused in school. in a study from , it was found that time spent on facebook has a strong negative relationship with overall gpa, but it was unclear if this was related to sleep disturbances. since blue light has increasingly become an issue smartphone developers have added a night mode feature that does not cause as much strain to the eyes as a blue light would[citation needed]. one studied emotional effect of social media is 'facebook depression', which is a type of depression that affects adolescents who spend too much of their free time engaging with social media sites. this may lead to problems such as reclusiveness which can negatively damage one's health by creating feelings of loneliness and low self-esteem among young people. a study of almost , adolescent students showed that those who self-reported addiction-like symptoms of social media use were more likely to report low self-esteem and high levels of depressive symptoms. in a different study conducted in , those who used the most multiple social media platforms ( to ) had more than three times the risk of depression and anxiety than people who used the fewest ( to ). a second emotional effect is social media burnout, which is defined by bo han as ambivalence, emotional exhaustion, and depersonalization. ambivalence refers to a user's confusion about the benefits she can get from using a social media site. emotional exhaustion refers to the stress a user has when using a social media site. depersonalization refers to the emotional detachment from a social media site a user experiences. the three burnout factors can all negatively influence the user's social media continuance. this study provides an instrument to measure the burnout a user can experience when his or her social media "friends" are generating an overwhelming amount of useless information (e.g., "what i had for dinner", "where i am now"). a third emotional effect is the "fear of missing out" (fomo), which is defined as the "pervasive apprehension that others might be having rewarding experiences from which one is absent." fomo has been classified by some as a form of social anxiety. it is associated with checking updates on friends' activities on social media. some speculate that checking updates on friends' activities on social media may be associated with negative influences on people's psychological health and well-being because it could contribute to negative mood and depressed feelings. on the other hand, social media can sometimes have a supportive effect on individuals who use it. twitter has been used more by the medical community. while twitter can facilitate academic discussion among health professionals and students, it can also provide a supportive community for these individuals by fostering a sense of community and allowing individuals to support each other through tweets, likes, and comments. the digital divide is a measure of disparity in the level of access to technology between households, socioeconomic levels or other demographic categories. people who are homeless, living in poverty, elderly people and those living in rural or remote communities may have little or no access to computers and the internet; in contrast, middle class and upper-class people in urban areas have very high rates of computer and internet access. other models argue that within a modern information society, some individuals produce internet content while others only consume it, which could be a result of disparities in the education system where only some teachers integrate technology into the classroom and teach critical thinking. while social media has differences among age groups, a study in the united states found no racial divide. some zero-rating programs offer subsidized data access to certain websites on low-cost plans. critics say that this is an anti-competitive program that undermines net neutrality and creates a "walled garden" for platforms like facebook zero. a study found that % of nigerians, % of indonesians, and % of indians agree with the statement that "facebook is the internet" compared with only % in the us. eric ehrmann contends that social media in the form of public diplomacy create a patina of inclusiveness that covers traditional economic interests that are structured to ensure that wealth is pumped up to the top of the economic pyramid, perpetuating the digital divide and post-marxian class conflict. he also voices concern over the trend that finds social utilities operating in a quasi-libertarian global environment of oligopoly that requires users in economically challenged nations to spend high percentages of annual income to pay for devices and services to participate in the social media lifestyle. neil postman also contends that social media will increase an information disparity between "winners" – who are able to use the social media actively – and "losers" – who are not familiar with modern technologies or who do not have access to them. people with high social media skills may have better access to information about job opportunities, potential new friends, and social activities in their area, which may enable them to improve their standard of living and their quality of life. according to the pew research center, a majority of americans at least occasionally receive news from social media. because of algorithms on social media which filter and display news content which are likely to match their users’ political preferences, a potential impact of receiving news from social media includes an increase in political polarization due to selective exposure. political polarization refers to when an individual's stance on a topic is more likely to be strictly defined by their identification with a specific political party or ideology than on other factors. selective exposure occurs when an individual favors information that supports their beliefs and avoids information that conflicts with their beliefs. a study by hayat and samuel-azran conducted during the u.s.

 presidential election observed an "echo chamber" effect of selective exposure among , twitter users following the content of cable news shows. the twitter users observed in the study were found to have little interaction with users and content whose beliefs were different from their own, possibly heightening polarization effects. another study using u.s. elections, conducted by evans and clark, revealed gender differences in the political use of twitter between candidates. whilst politics is a male dominated arena, on social media the situation appears to be the opposite, with women discussing policy issues at a higher rate than their male counter-parts. the study concluded that an increase in female candidates directly correlates to an increase in the amount of attention paid to policy issues, potentially heightening political polarization. efforts to combat selective exposure in social media may also cause an increase in political polarization. a study examining twitter activity conducted by bail et al. paid democrat and republican participants to follow twitter handles whose content was different from their political beliefs (republicans received liberal content and democrats received conservative content) over a six-week period. at the end of the study, both democrat and republican participants were found to have increased political polarization in favor of their own parties, though only republican participants had an increase that was statistically significant. though research has shown evidence that social media plays a role in increasing political polarization, it has also shown evidence that social media use leads to a persuasion of political beliefs. an online survey consisting of , u.s. participants was conducted by diehl, weeks, and gil de zuñiga, which found that individuals who use social media were more likely to have their political beliefs persuaded than those who did not. in particular, those using social media as a means to receive their news were the most likely to have their political beliefs changed. diehl et al. found that the persuasion reported by participants was influenced by the exposure to diverse viewpoints they experienced, both in the content they saw as well as the political discussions they participated in. similarly, a study by hardy and colleagues conducted with students from a midwestern state university examined the persuasive effect of watching a political comedy video on facebook. hardy et al. found that after watching a facebook video of the comedian/political commentator john oliver performing a segment on his show, participants were likely to be persuaded to change their viewpoint on the topic they watched (either payday lending or the ferguson protests) to one that was closer to the opinion expressed by oliver. furthermore, the persuasion experienced by the participants was found to be reduced if they viewed comments by facebook users which contradicted the arguments made by oliver. research has also shown that social media use may not have an effect on polarization at all. a u.s. national survey of , participants conducted by lee et al. found that participants who used social media were more likely to be exposed to a diverse number of people and amount of opinion than those who did not, although using social media was not correlated with a change in political polarization for these participants. in a study examining the potential polarizing effects of social media on the political views of its users, mihailidis and viotty suggest that a new way of engaging with social media must occur to avoid polarization. the authors note that media literacies (described as methods which give people skills to critique and create media) are important to using social media in a responsible and productive way, and state that these literacies must be changed further in order to have the most effectiveness. in order to decrease polarization and encourage cooperation among social media users, mihailidis and viotty suggest that media literacies must focus on teaching individuals how to connect with other people in a caring way, embrace differences, and understand the ways in which social media has a real impact on the political, social, and cultural issues of the society they are a part of. recent research has demonstrated that social media, and media in general, have the power to increase the scope of stereotypes not only in children but people of all ages. three researchers at blanquerna university, spain, examined how adolescents interact with social media and specifically facebook. they suggest that interactions on the website encourage representing oneself in the traditional gender constructs, which helps maintain gender stereotypes. the authors noted that girls generally show more emotion in their posts and more frequently change their profile pictures, which according to some psychologists can lead to self-objectification. on the other hand, the researchers found that boys prefer to portray themselves as strong, independent, and powerful. for example, men often post pictures of objects and not themselves, and rarely change their profile pictures; using the pages more for entertainment and pragmatic reasons. in contrast, girls generally post more images that include themselves, friends and things they have emotional ties to, which the researchers attributed that to the higher emotional intelligence of girls at a younger age. the authors sampled over girls and boys from the ages of – from spain in an effort to confirm their beliefs. the researchers concluded that masculinity is more commonly associated with positive psychological well-being, while femininity displays less psychological well-being. furthermore, the researchers discovered that people tend not to completely conform to either stereotype, and encompass desirable parts of both. users of facebook generally use their profiles to reflect that they are a "normal" person. social media was found to uphold gender stereotypes both feminine and masculine. the researchers also noted that traditional stereotypes are often upheld by boys more so than girls. the authors described how neither stereotype was entirely positive, but most people viewed masculine values as more positive. social media has allowed for mass cultural exchange and intercultural communication. as different cultures have different value systems, cultural themes, grammar, and world views, they also communicate differently. the emergence of social media platforms fused together different cultures and their communication methods, blending together various cultural thinking patterns and expression styles. [better source needed] social media has affected the way youth communicate, by introducing new forms of language. abbreviations have been introduced to cut down on the time it takes to respond online. the commonly known "lol" has become globally recognized as the abbreviation for "laugh out loud" thanks to social media. another trend that influences the way youth communicates is (through) the use of hashtags. with the introduction of social media platforms such as twitter, facebook and instagram, the hashtag was created to easily organize and search for information. hashtags can be used when people want to advocate for a movement, store content or tweets from a movement for future use, and allow other social media users to contribute to a discussion about a certain movement by using existing hashtags. using hashtags as a way to advocate for something online makes it easier and more accessible for more people to acknowledge it around the world. as hashtags such as #tbt ("throwback thursday") become a part of online communication, it influenced the way in which youth share and communicate in their daily lives. because of these changes in linguistics and communication etiquette, researchers of media semiotics[who?] have found that this has altered youth's communications habits and more.[vague][citation needed] social media has offered a new platform for peer pressure with both positive and negative communication. from facebook comments to likes on instagram, how the youth communicate, and what is socially acceptable is now heavily based on social media. social media does make kids and young adults more susceptible to peer pressure. the american academy of pediatrics has also shown that bullying, the making of non-inclusive friend groups, and sexual experimentation have increased situations related to cyberbullying, issues with privacy, and the act of sending sexual images or messages to someone's mobile device. on the other hand, social media also benefits the youth and how they communicate. adolescents can learn basic social and technical skills that are essential in society. through the use of social media, kids and young adults are able to strengthen relationships by keeping in touch with friends and family, make more friends, and participate in community engagement activities and services. criticisms of social media range from criticisms of the ease of use of specific platforms and their capabilities, disparity of information available, issues with trustworthiness and reliability of information presented, the impact of social media use on an individual's concentration, ownership of media content, and the meaning of interactions created by social media. although some social media platforms, such as servers in the decentralised fediverse, offer users the opportunity to cross-post between independently run servers using a standard protocol such as activitypub, the dominant social network platforms have been criticized for poor interoperability between platforms, which leads to the creation of information silos, viz. isolated pockets of data contained in one social media platform. however, it is also argued that social media has positive effects, such as allowing the democratization of the internet while also allowing individuals to advertise themselves and form friendships. others have noted that the term "social" cannot account for technological features of a platform alone, hence the level of sociability should be determined by the actual performances of its users. there has been a dramatic decrease in face-to-face interactions as more and more social media platforms have been introduced with the threat of cyber-bullying and online sexual predators being more prevalent. social media may expose children to images of alcohol, tobacco, and sexual behaviors.[relevant?] in regards to cyber-bullying, it has been proven that individuals who have no experience with cyber-bullying often have a better well-being than individuals who have been bullied online. twitter is increasingly a target of heavy activity of marketers. their actions focused on gaining massive numbers of followers, include use of advanced scripts and manipulation techniques that distort the prime idea of social media by abusing human trustfulness. british-american entrepreneur and author andrew keen criticizes social media in his book the cult of the amateur, writing, "out of this anarchy, it suddenly became clear that what was governing the infinite monkeys now inputting away on the internet was the law of digital darwinism, the survival of the loudest and most opinionated. under these rules, the only way to intellectually prevail is by infinite filibustering." this is also relative to the issue "justice" in the social network. for example, the phenomenon "human flesh search engine" in asia raised the discussion of "private-law" brought by social network platform. comparative media professor josé van dijck contends in her book the culture of connectivity ( ) that to understand the full weight of social media, their technological dimensions should be connected to the social and the cultural. she critically describes six social media platforms. one of her findings is the way facebook had been successful in framing the term 'sharing' in such a way that third party use of user data is neglected in favor of intra-user connectedness. essena o'neill attracted international coverage when she explicitly left social media. there has been speculation[by whom?] that social media has become perceived as a trustworthy source of information by a large number of people. the continuous interpersonal connectivity on social media, for example, may lead to people regarding peer recommendations as indicators of the reliability of information sources. this trust can be exploited by marketers, who can utilize consumer-created content about brands and products to influence public perceptions. the trustworthiness of information can be improved by fact-checking. some social media has started to employ this. evgeny morozov, a – yahoo fellow at georgetown university, contended that information uploaded to twitter may have little relevance to the masses of people who do not use twitter. in an article for the magazine dissent titled "iran: downside to the 'twitter revolution'", morozov wrote: [b]y its very design twitter only adds to the noise: it's simply impossible to pack much context into its characters. all other biases are present as well: in a country like iran it's mostly pro-western, technology-friendly and ipod-carrying young people who are the natural and most frequent users of twitter. they are a tiny and, most important, extremely untypical segment of the iranian population (the number of twitter users in iran — a country of more than seventy million people — was estimated at less than twenty thousand before the protests). in contrast, in the united states (where twitter originated), the social network had million accounts as of [update]. professor matthew auer of bates college casts doubt on the conventional wisdom that social media are open and participatory. he also speculates on the emergence of "anti-social media" used as "instruments of pure control". social media 'mining' is a type of data mining, a technique of analyzing data to detect patterns. social media mining is a process of representing, analyzing, and extracting actionable patterns from data collected from people's activities on social media. google mines data in many ways including using an algorithm in gmail to analyze information in emails. this use of the information will then affect the type of advertisements shown to the user when they use gmail. facebook has partnered with many data mining companies such as datalogix and bluekai to use customer information for targeted advertising. massive amounts of data from social platforms allows scientists and machine learning researchers to extract insights and build product features. ethical questions of the extent to which a company should be able to utilize a user's information have been called "big data". users tend to click through terms of use agreements when signing up on social media platforms, and they do not know how their information will be used by companies. this leads to questions of privacy and surveillance when user data is recorded. some social media outlets have added capture time and geotagging that helps provide information about the context of the data as well as making their data more accurate. on april , , in a hearing held in response to revelations of data harvesting by cambridge analytica, mark zuckerberg, the facebook chief executive, faced questions from senators on a variety of issues, from privacy to the company's business model and the company's mishandling of data. this was mr. zuckerberg's first appearance before congress, prompted by the revelation that cambridge analytica, a political consulting firm linked to the trump campaign, harvested the data of an estimated million facebook users to psychologically profile voters during the election. zuckerberg was pressed to account for how third-party partners could take data without users’ knowledge. lawmakers grilled the -year-old executive on the proliferation of so-called fake news on facebook, russian interference during the presidential election and censorship of conservative media. for malcolm gladwell, the role of social media, such as twitter and facebook, in revolutions and protests is overstated. on one hand, social media makes it easier for individuals, and in this case activists, to express themselves. on the other hand, it is harder for that expression to have an impact. gladwell distinguishes between social media activism and high-risk activism, which brings real changes. activism and especially high-risk activism involves strong-tie relationships, hierarchies, coordination, motivation, exposing oneself to high risks, making sacrifices. gladwell discusses that social media are built around weak ties and he argues that "social networks are effective at increasing participation — by lessening the level of motivation that participation requires." according to him, "facebook activism succeeds not by motivating people to make a real sacrifice, but by motivating them to do the things that people do when they are not motivated enough to make a real sacrifice." disputing gladwell's theory, in the study "perceptions of social media for politics: testing the slacktivism hypothesis", kwak and colleagues ( ) conducted a survey which found that people who are politically expressive on social media are also more likely to participate in offline political activity. social media content is generated through social media interactions done by users through the site. there has always been a huge debate on the ownership of the content on social media platforms because it is generated by the users and hosted by the company. added to this is the danger to the security of information, which can be leaked to third parties with economic interests in the platform, or parasites who comb the data for their own databases. privacy rights advocates warn users on social media about the collection of their personal data. some information is captured without the user's knowledge or consent through electronic tracking and third-party applications. data may also be collected for law enforcement and governmental purposes, by social media intelligence using data mining techniques. data and information may also be collected for third party use. when information is shared on social media, that information is no longer private. there have been many cases in which young persons especially, share personal information, which can attract predators. it is very important to monitor what you share and to be aware of who you could potentially be sharing that information with. teens especially share significantly more information on the internet now than they have in the past. teens are much more likely to share their personal information, such as email address, phone number, and school names. studies suggest that teens are not aware of what they are posting and how much of that information can be accessed by third parties. there are arguments that "privacy is dead" and that with social media growing more and more, some heavy social media users appear to have become quite unconcerned with privacy. others argue, however, that people are still very concerned about their privacy, but are being ignored by the companies running these social networks, who can sometimes make a profit off of sharing someone's personal information. there is also a disconnect between social media user's words and their actions. studies suggest that surveys show that people want to keep their lives private, but their actions on social media suggest otherwise. everyone leaves a trail when they use social media. every time someone creates a new social media account, they provide personal information that can include their name, birthdate, geographic location, and personal interests. in addition, companies collect data on user behaviors. all of this data is stored and leveraged by companies to better target advertising to their users. another factor is ignorance of how accessible social media posts are. some social media users who have been criticized for inappropriate comments stated that they did not realize that anyone outside their circle of friends would read their posts; in fact, on some social media sites, unless a user selects higher privacy settings, their content is shared with a wide audience. according to a article diving into the topic of sharing privately and the effect social media has on expectations of privacy, " . billion people will log into their facebook accounts, million tweets will be sent, and there will be million photos and videos posted on instagram" in a day. much of the privacy concerns individuals face stem from their own posts on a form of a social network. users have the choice to share voluntarily and have been ingrained into society as routine and normative. social media are a snapshot of our lives; a community we have created on the behaviors of sharing, posting, liking, and communicating. sharing has become a phenomenon which social media and networks have uprooted and introduced to the world. the idea of privacy is redundant; once something is posted, its accessibility remains constant even if we select who is potentially able to view it. people desire privacy in some shape or form, yet also contribute to social media, which makes it difficult to maintain privacy. mills offers options for reform which include copyright and the application of the law of confidence; more radically, a change to the concept of privacy itself. a pew research center survey found that % of americans "agree" or "strongly agree" that people have lost control over how personal information is collected and used by all kinds of entities. some % of social media users said they were concerned about advertisers and businesses accessing the data they share on social media platforms, and % said the government should do more to regulate advertisers. according to the wall street journal published on february , , according to uk law, facebook did not protect certain aspects of the user data. the us government announced banning tiktok and wechat from the states over national security concerns. the shutdown was announced for september , . access to tiktok was extended till november , and a federal court ruling on october , , has blocked further implementation of restrictions that would lead to tiktok's shutdown. the commercial development of social media has been criticized as the actions of consumers in these settings have become increasingly value-creating, for example when consumers contribute to the marketing and branding of specific products by posting positive reviews. as such, value-creating activities also increase the value of a specific product, which could, according to marketing professors bernad cova and daniele dalli ( ), lead to what they refer to as "double exploitation." companies are getting consumers to create content for the companies' websites for which the consumers are not paid. as social media usage has become increasingly widespread, social media has to a large extent come to be subjected to commercialization by marketing companies and advertising agencies. christofer laurell ( ), a digital marketing researcher, suggested that the social media landscape currently consists of three types of places because of this development: consumer-dominated places, professionally dominated places and places undergoing commercialization. as social media becomes commercialized, this process have been shown to create novel forms of value networks stretching between consumer and producer in which a combination of personal, private and commercial contents are created. as one of the biggest preoccupations among adolescents is social media usage, researchers have begun using the term "facebook addiction disorder" (f.a.d.), a form of internet addiction disorder. fad is characterized by compulsive use of the social networking site facebook, which generally results in physical or psychological complications. the disorder, although not classified in the latest diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (dsm- ) or by the world health organization, has been the subject of several studies focusing on the negative effects on the psyche. one german study, published in , investigated a correlation between extensive use of the social networking site and narcissism; the results were published in the journal plos one. according to the findings: "fad was significantly positively related to the personality trait narcissism and to negative mental health variables (depression, anxiety, and stress symptoms)." while these issues regarding social media addiction are continuous and increasing, there are ways to help reduce and curb one's social media obsessions. turning off notifications (temporary or long-term) is one solution that is deemed beneficial in attempts to lessen social media addiction by resolving issues of distraction, for those who struggle with the habit of constantly refreshing social media platforms and checking for new notifications. having social media in the classroom was a controversial topic in the s. many parents and educators have been fearful of the repercussions of having social media in the classroom. there are concerns that social media tools can be misused for cyberbullying or sharing inappropriate content. as result, cell phones have been banned from some classrooms, and some schools have blocked many popular social media websites. many schools have realized that they need to loosen restrictions, teach digital citizenship skills, and even incorporate these tools into classrooms. some schools permit students to use smartphones or tablet computers in class, as long as the students are using these devices for academic purposes, such as doing research. using facebook in class allows for the integration of multimodal content such as student-created photographs and video and urls to other texts, in a platform that many students are already familiar with. twitter can be used to enhance communication building and critical thinking and it provides students with an informal "back channel", and extend discussion outside of class time. social media often features in political struggles to control public perception and online activity. in some countries, internet police or secret police monitor or control citizens' use of social media. for example, in some social media was banned in turkey after the taksim gezi park protests. both twitter and youtube were temporarily suspended in the country by a court's decision. a new law, passed by turkish parliament, has granted immunity to telecommunications directorate (ti̇b) personnel.

 the ti̇b was also given the authority to block access to specific websites without the need for a court order. yet ti̇b's blocking of twitter was ruled by the constitutional court to violate free speech. more recently, in the thai coup d'état, the public was explicitly instructed not to 'share' or 'like' dissenting views on social media or face prison. in july of that same year, in response to wikileaks' release of a secret suppression order made by the victorian supreme court, media lawyers were quoted in the australian media to the effect that "anyone who tweets a link to the wikileaks report, posts it on facebook, or shares it in any way online could also face charges". on july , in egypt, two women were sentenced to two years of imprisonment for posting tiktok videos, which the government claims are “violating family values”. mastodon, gnu social, diaspora, friendica and other compatible software packages operate as a loose federation of mostly volunteer-operated servers, called the fediverse, which connect with each other through the open source protocol activitypub. in early , mastodon successfully blocked the spread of violent right-wing extremism when the twitter alternative gab tried to associate with mastodon, and their independent servers quickly contained its dissemination. in december , twitter ceo jack dorsey made a similar suggestion, stating that efforts would be taken to achieve an "open and decentralized standard for social media". rather than "deplatforming", such standards would allow a more scalable, and customizable approach to content moderation and censorship, and involve a number of companies, in the way that e-mail servers work.[citation needed] deplatforming is a form of internet censorship in which controversial speakers or speech are suspended, banned, or otherwise shut down by social media platforms and other service providers that normally provide a venue for free expression. these kinds of actions are similar to alternative dispute resolution. : as early as , platforms such as reddit began to enforce selective bans based, for example, on terms of service that prohibit "hate speech". according to technology journalist declan mccullagh, "silicon valley's efforts to pull the plug on dissenting opinions" have included, as of [update], twitter, facebook, and youtube "devising excuses to suspend ideologically disfavored accounts". law professor glenn reynolds dubbed the "year of deplatforming", in an august article in the wall street journal. according to reynolds, in , "the internet giants decided to slam the gates on a number of people and ideas they don't like. if you rely on someone else's platform to express unpopular ideas, especially ideas on the right, you're now at risk." reynolds cited alex jones, gavin mcinnes and dennis prager as prominent victims of deplatforming based on their political views, noting, "extremists and controversialists on the left have been relatively safe from deplatforming." most people see social media platforms as censoring objectionable political views. according to danah boyd ( ), the media plays a large role in shaping people's perceptions of specific social networking services. when looking at the site myspace, after adults started to realize how popular the site was becoming with teens, news media became heavily concerned with teen participation and the potential dangers they faced using the site. as a result, teens avoided joining the site because of the associated risks (e.g. child predators and lack of control), and parents began to publicly denounce the site. ultimately, the site was labeled as dangerous, and many were detracted from interacting with the site. as boyd also describes, when facebook initially launched in , it solely targeted college students and access was intentionally limited. facebook started as a harvard-only social networking service before expanding to all other ivy league schools. it then made its way to other top universities and ultimately to a wider range of schools. because of its origins, some saw facebook as an "elite" social networking service. while it was very open and accepting to some, it seemed to outlaw and shun out most others who didn't fit that "elite" categorization. these narratives propagated by the media influenced the large movement of teenage users from one social networking service to another. according to likewar: the weaponization of social media ( ) by p.w. singer and emerson t. brooking, the use of effective social media marketing techniques is not only limited to celebrities, corporations, and governments, but also extremist groups to carry out political objectives based on extremist ideologies. the use of social media by isis and al-qaeda has been used primarily to influence operations in areas of operation and gain the attention of sympathizers of extremist ideologies. social media platforms like youtube, twitter, facebook, and various encrypted-messaging applications have been used to increase the recruiting of members into these extremist groups, both locally and internationally. larger platforms like youtube, twitter, and various others have received backlash for allowing this type of content on their platform (see use of social media by the islamic state of iraq and the levant). the use of social media to further extremist objectives is not only limited to islamic terrorism, but also extreme nationalist groups across the world, and more prominently, right wing extremist groups based out of the united states. as many of the traditional social media platforms banned hate speech (see online hate speech), several platforms have become popular among right-wing extremists to carry out planning and communication of thoughts and organized events; these application became known as "alt-tech". platforms such as telegram, parler, and gab were used during the storming of the us capitol in washington, d.c. the use of this social media was used to coordinate attacks on the capitol. several members within these groups shared tips on how to avoid law enforcement and what their plans were with regards to carrying out their objectives; some users called for killings of law enforcement and politicians. social media content, like most content on the web, will continue to persist unless the user deletes it. this brings up the inevitable question of what to do once a social media user dies, and no longer has access to their content. as it is a topic that is often left undiscussed, it is important to note that each social media platform, e.g., twitter, facebook, instagram, linkedin, and pinterest, has created its own guidelines for users who have died. in most cases on social media, the platforms require a next-of-kin to prove that the user is deceased, and then give them the option of closing the account or maintaining it in a 'legacy' status. ultimately, social media users should make decisions about what happens to their social media accounts before they pass, and make sure their instructions are passed on to their next-of-kin.

 politics (from greek: πολιτικά, politiká, 'affairs of the cities') is the set of activities that are associated with making decisions in groups, or other forms of power relations between individuals, such as the distribution of resources or status. the branch of social science that studies politics and government is referred to as political science. it may be used positively in the context of a "political solution" which is compromising and non-violent, or descriptively as "the art or science of government", but also often carries a negative connotation. for example, abolitionist wendell phillips declared that "we do not play politics; anti-slavery is no half-jest with us." the concept has been defined in various ways, and different approaches have fundamentally differing views on whether it should be used extensively or limitedly, empirically or normatively, and on whether conflict or co-operation is more essential to it. a variety of methods are deployed in politics, which include promoting one's own political views among people, negotiation with other political subjects, making laws, and exercising force, including warfare against adversaries. politics is exercised on a wide range of social levels, from clans and tribes of traditional societies, through modern local governments, companies and institutions up to sovereign states, to the international level. in modern nation states, people often form political parties to represent their ideas. members of a party often agree to take the same position on many issues and agree to support the same changes to law and the same leaders. an election is usually a competition between different parties. a political system is a framework which defines acceptable political methods within a society. the history of political thought can be traced back to early antiquity, with seminal works such as plato's republic, aristotle's politics in western philosophy. eastern philosophers such as chanakya's arthashastra and chanakya niti also study the affairs on how governments organize and power moves in a society ( rd century bce).

 chinese philosopher confucius also wrote political manuscripts and contributed to the eastern political zeitgeist. the english politics has its roots in the name of aristotle's classic work, politiká, which introduced the greek term politiká (πολιτικά, 'affairs of the cities'). in the mid- th century, aristotle's composition would be rendered in early modern english as polettiques [sic],[a] which would become politics in modern english. the singular politic first attested in english in , coming from middle french politique—itself taking from politicus, a latinization of the greek πολιτικός (politikos) from πολίτης (polites, 'citizen') and πόλις (polis, 'city'). politics comprises all the activities of co-operation, negotiation and conflict within and between societies, whereby people go about organizing the use, production or distribution of human, natural and other resources in the course of the production and reproduction of their biological and social life. there are several ways in which approaching politics has been conceptualized. adrian leftwich has differentiated views of politics based on how extensive or limited their perception of what accounts as 'political' is. the extensive view sees politics as present across the sphere of human social relations, while the limited view restricts it to certain contexts. for example, in a more restrictive way, politics may be viewed as primarily about governance, while a feminist perspective could argue that sites which have been viewed traditionally as non-political, should indeed be viewed as political as well. this latter position is encapsulated in the slogan the personal is political, which disputes the distinction between private and public issues. instead, politics may be defined by the use of power, as has been argued by robert a. dahl. some perspectives on politics view it empirically as an exercise of power, while others see it as a social function with a normative basis. this distinction has been called the difference between political moralism and political realism. for moralists, politics is closely linked to ethics, and is at its extreme in utopian thinking. for example, according to hannah arendt, the view of aristotle was that "to be political…meant that everything was decided through words and persuasion and not through violence;" while according to bernard crick "[p]olitics is the way in which free societies are governed. politics is politics and other forms of rule are something else." in contrast, for realists, represented by those such as niccolò machiavelli, thomas hobbes, and harold lasswell, politics is based on the use of power, irrespective of the ends being pursued. agonism argues that politics essentially comes down to conflict between conflicting interests. political scientist elmer schattschneider argued that "at the root of all politics is the universal language of conflict," while for carl schmitt the essence of politics is the distinction of 'friend' from foe'. this is in direct contrast to the more co-operative views of politics by aristotle and crick. however, a more mixed view between these extremes is provided by irish political scientist michael laver, who noted that:politics is about the characteristic blend of conflict and co-operation that can be found so often in human interactions. pure conflict is war. pure co-operation is true love. politics is a mixture of both. the history of politics spans human history and is not limited to modern institutions of government. frans de waal argued that already chimpanzees engage in politics through "social manipulation to secure and maintain influential positions." early human forms of social organization—bands and tribes—lacked centralized political structures. these are sometimes referred to as stateless societies. in ancient history, civilizations did not have definite boundaries as states have today, and their borders could be more accurately described as frontiers. early dynastic sumer, and early dynastic egypt were the first civilizations to define their borders. moreover, up to the th century, many people lived in non-state societies. these range from relatively egalitarian bands and tribes to complex and highly stratified chiefdoms. there are a number of different theories and hypotheses regarding early state formation that seek generalizations to explain why the state developed in some places but not others. other scholars believe that generalizations are unhelpful and that each case of early state formation should be treated on its own. voluntary theories contend that diverse groups of people came together to form states as a result of some shared rational interest. the theories largely focus on the development of agriculture, and the population and organizational pressure that followed and resulted in state formation. one of the most prominent theories of early and primary state formation is the hydraulic hypothesis, which contends that the state was a result of the need to build and maintain large-scale irrigation projects. conflict theories of state formation regard conflict and dominance of some population over another population as key to the formation of states. 

in contrast with voluntary theories, these arguments believe that people do not voluntarily agree to create a state to maximize benefits, but that states form due to some form of oppression by one group over others. some theories in turn argue that warfare was critical for state formation. the first states of sorts were those of early dynastic sumer and early dynastic egypt, which arose from the uruk period and predynastic egypt respectively around approximately bce. early dynastic egypt was based around the nile river in the north-east of africa, the kingdom's boundaries being based around the nile and stretching to areas where oases existed. early dynastic sumer was located in southern mesopotamia with its borders extending from the persian gulf to parts of the euphrates and tigris rivers. although state-forms existed before the rise of the ancient greek empire, the greeks were the first people known to have explicitly formulated a political philosophy of the state, and to have rationally analyzed political institutions. prior to this, states were described and justified in terms of religious myths. several important political innovations of classical antiquity came from the greek city-states (polis) and the roman republic. the greek city-states before the th century granted citizenship rights to their free population; in athens these rights were combined with a directly democratic form of government that was to have a long afterlife in political thought and history.[citation needed] the peace of westphalia ( ) is considered by political scientists to be the beginning of the modern international system, in which external powers should avoid interfering in another country's domestic affairs. the principle of non-interference in other countries' domestic affairs was laid out in the mid- th century by swiss jurist emer de vattel. states became the primary institutional agents in an interstate system of relations. the peace of westphalia is said to have ended attempts to impose supranational authority on european states. the "westphalian" doctrine of states as independent agents was bolstered by the rise in th century thought of nationalism, under which legitimate states were assumed to correspond to nations—groups of people united by language and culture. in europe, during the th century, the classic non-national states were the multinational empires: the austrian empire, kingdom of france, kingdom of hungary, the russian empire, the spanish empire, the ottoman empire, and the british empire. such empires also existed in asia, africa, and the americas; in the muslim world, immediately after the death of muhammad in , caliphates were established, which developed into multi-ethnic trans-national empires. the multinational empire was an absolute monarchy ruled by a king, emperor or sultan. the population belonged to many ethnic groups, and they spoke many languages. the empire was dominated by one ethnic group, and their language was usually the language of public administration. the ruling dynasty was usually, but not always, from that group. some of the smaller european states were not so ethnically diverse, but were also dynastic states, ruled by a royal house. a few of the smaller states survived, such as the independent principalities of liechtenstein, andorra, monaco, and the republic of san marino. most theories see the nation state as a th-century european phenomenon, facilitated by developments such as state-mandated education, mass literacy, and mass media. however, historians[who?] also note the early emergence of a relatively unified state and identity in portugal and the dutch republic. scholars such as steven weber, david woodward, michel foucault, and jeremy black have advanced the hypothesis that the nation state did not arise out of political ingenuity or an unknown undetermined source, nor was it an accident of history or political invention. rather, the nation state is an inadvertent byproduct of th-century intellectual discoveries in political economy, capitalism, mercantilism, political geography, and geography combined together with cartography and advances in map-making technologies. some nation states, such as germany and italy, came into existence at least partly as a result of political campaigns by nationalists, during the th century. in both cases, the territory was previously divided among other states, some of them very small. liberal ideas of free trade played a role in german unification, which was preceded by a customs union, the zollverein. national self-determination was a key aspect of united states president woodrow wilson's fourteen points, leading to the dissolution of the austro-hungarian empire and the ottoman empire after the first world war, while the russian empire became the soviet union after the russian civil war. decolonization lead to the creation of new nation states in place of multinational empires in the third world. political globalization began in the th century through intergovernmental organizations and supranational unions. the league of nations was founded after world war i, and after world war ii it was replaced by the united nations. various international treaties have been signed through it. regional integration has been pursued by the african union, asean, the european union, and mercosur. international political institutions on the international level include the international criminal court, the international monetary fund, and the world trade organization. the study of politics is called political science, or politology. it comprises numerous subfields, including comparative politics, political economy, international relations, political philosophy, public administration, public policy, gender and politics, and political methodology. furthermore, political science is related to, and draws upon, the fields of economics, law, sociology, history, philosophy, geography, psychology/psychiatry, anthropology, and neurosciences. comparative politics is the science of comparison and teaching of different types of constitutions, political actors, legislature and associated fields, all of them from an intrastate perspective. international relations deals with the interaction between nation-states as well as intergovernmental and transnational organizations. political philosophy is more concerned with contributions of various classical and contemporary thinkers and philosophers. political science is methodologically diverse and appropriates many methods originating in psychology, social research, and cognitive neuroscience. approaches include positivism, interpretivism, rational choice theory, behavioralism, structuralism, post-structuralism, realism, institutionalism, and pluralism. political science, as one of the social sciences, uses methods and techniques that relate to the kinds of inquiries sought: primary sources such as historical documents and official records, secondary sources such as scholarly journal articles, survey research, statistical analysis, case studies, experimental research, and model building. the political system defines the process for making official government decisions. it is usually compared to the legal system, economic system, cultural system, and other social systems. 

according to david easton, "a political system can be designated as the interactions through which values are authoritatively allocated for a society." each political system is embedded in a society with its own political culture, and they in turn shape their societies through public policy. the interactions between different political systems are the basis for global politics. forms of government can be classified by several ways. in terms of the structure of power, there are monarchies (including constitutional monarchies) and republics (usually presidential, semi-presidential, or parliamentary). the separation of powers describes the degree of horizontal integration between the legislature, the executive, the judiciary, and other independent institutions. the source of power determines the difference between democracies, oligarchies, and autocracies. in a democracy, political legitimacy is based on popular sovereignty. forms of democracy include representative democracy, direct democracy, and demarchy. these are separated by the way decisions are made, whether by elected representatives, referendums, or by citizen juries. democracies can be either republics or constitutional monarchies. oligarchy is a power structure where a minority rules. these may be in the form of anocracy, aristocracy, ergatocracy, geniocracy, gerontocracy, kakistocracy, kleptocracy, meritocracy, noocracy, particracy, plutocracy, stratocracy, technocracy, theocracy, or timocracy. autocracies are either dictatorships (including military dictatorships) or absolute monarchies.in terms of level of vertical integration, political systems can be divided into (from least to most integrated) confederations, federations, and unitary states. a federation (also known as a federal state) is a political entity characterized by a union of partially self-governing provinces, states, or other regions under a central federal government (federalism). in a federation, the self-governing status of the component states, as well as the division of power between them and the central government, is typically constitutionally entrenched and may not be altered by a unilateral decision of either party, the states or the federal political body. federations were formed first in switzerland, then in the united states in , in canada in and in germany in and in , australia. compared to a federation, a confederation has less centralized power. all the above forms of government are variations of the same basic polity, the sovereign state. the state has been defined by max weber as a political entity that has monopoly on violence within its territory, while the montevideo convention holds that states need to have a defined territory; a permanent population; a government; and a capacity to enter into international relations. a stateless society is a society that is not governed by a state. in stateless societies, there is little concentration of authority; most positions of authority that do exist are very limited in power and are generally not permanently held positions; and social bodies that resolve disputes through predefined rules tend to be small. stateless societies are highly variable in economic organization and cultural practices. while stateless societies were the norm in human prehistory, few stateless societies exist today; almost the entire global population resides within the jurisdiction of a sovereign state. in some regions nominal state authorities may be very weak and wield little or no actual power. over the course of history most stateless peoples have been integrated into the state-based societies around them. some political philosophies consider the state undesirable, and thus consider the formation of a stateless society a goal to be achieved. a central tenet of anarchism is the advocacy of society without states. the type of society sought for varies significantly between anarchist schools of thought, ranging from extreme individualism to complete collectivism. in marxism, marx's theory of the state considers that in a post-capitalist society the state, an undesirable institution, would be unnecessary and wither away. a related concept is that of stateless communism, a phrase sometimes used to describe marx's anticipated post-capitalist society. constitutions are written documents that specify and limit the powers of the different branches of government. although a constitution is a written document, there is also an unwritten constitution. the unwritten constitution is continually being written by the legislative and judiciary branch of government; this is just one of those cases in which the nature of the circumstances determines the form of government that is most appropriate. england did set the fashion of written constitutions during the civil war but after the restoration abandoned them to be taken up later by the american colonies after their emancipation and then france after the revolution and the rest of europe including the european colonies. constitutions often set out separation of powers, dividing the government into the executive, the legislature, and the judiciary (together referred to as the trias politica), in order to achieve checks and balances within the state. additional independent branches may also be created, including civil service commissions, election commissions, and supreme audit institutions. political culture describes how culture impacts politics. every political system is embedded in a particular political culture. lucian pye's definition is that "political culture is the set of attitudes, beliefs, and sentiments, which give order and meaning to a political process and which provide the underlying assumptions and rules that govern behavior in the political system". trust is a major factor in political culture, as its level determines the capacity of the state to function. postmaterialism is the degree to which a political culture is concerned with issues which are not of immediate physical or material concern, such as human rights and environmentalism. religion has also an impact on political culture. political corruption is the use of powers for illegitimate private gain, conducted by government officials or their network contacts. 

forms of political corruption include bribery, cronyism, nepotism, and political patronage. forms of political patronage, in turn, includes clientelism, earmarking, pork barreling, slush funds, and spoils systems; as well as political machines, which is a political system that operates for corrupt ends. when corruption is embedded in political culture, this may be referred to as patrimonialism or neopatrimonialism. a form of government that is built on corruption is called a kleptocracy ('rule of thieves'). political conflict entails the use of political violence to achieve political ends. as noted by carl von clausewitz, "war is a mere continuation of politics by other means." beyond just inter-state warfare, this may include civil war; wars of national liberation; or asymmetric warfare, such as guerrilla war or terrorism. when a political system is overthrown, the event is called a revolution: it is a political revolution if it does not go further; or a social revolution if the social system is also radically altered. however, these may also be nonviolent revolutions. macropolitics can either describe political issues that affect an entire political system (e.g. the nation state), or refer to interactions between political systems (e.g. international relations). global politics (or world politics) covers all aspects of politics that affect multiple political systems, in practice meaning any political phenomenon crossing national borders. this can include cities, nation-states, multinational corporations, non-governmental organizations, and/or international organizations. an important element is international relations: the relations between nation-states may be peaceful when they are conducted through diplomacy, or they may be violent, which is described as war. states that are able to exert strong international influence are referred to as superpowers, whereas less-powerful ones may be called regional or middle powers. the international system of power is called the world order, which is affected by the balance of power that defines the degree of polarity in the system. emerging powers are potentially destabilizing to it, especially if they display revanchism or irredentism. politics inside the limits of political systems, which in contemporary context correspond to national borders, are referred to as domestic politics. this includes most forms of public policy, such as social policy, economic policy, or law enforcement, which are executed by the state bureaucracy. mesopolitics describes the politics of intermediary structures within a political system, such as national political parties or movements. a political party is a political organization that typically seeks to attain and maintain political power within government, usually by participating in political campaigns, educational outreach, or protest actions. parties often espouse an expressed ideology or vision, bolstered by a written platform with specific goals, forming a coalition among disparate interests. political parties within a particular political system together form the party system, which can be either multiparty, two-party, dominant-party, or one-party, depending on the level of pluralism. this is affected by characteristics of the political system, including its electoral system. according to duverger's law, first-past-the-post systems are likely to lead to two-party systems, while proportional representation systems are more likely to create a multiparty system. micropolitics describes the actions of individual actors within the political system. this is often described as political participation. political participation may take many forms, including: democracy is a system of processing conflicts in which outcomes depend on what participants do, but no single force controls what occurs and its outcomes. the uncertainty of outcomes is inherent in democracy. democracy makes all forces struggle repeatedly to realize their interests and devolves power from groups of people to sets of rules. among modern political theorists, there are three contending conceptions of democracy: aggregative, deliberative, and radical. 

the theory of aggregative democracy claims that the aim of the democratic processes is to solicit the preferences of citizens, and aggregate them together to determine what social policies the society should adopt. therefore, proponents of this view hold that democratic participation should primarily focus on voting, where the policy with the most votes gets implemented. different variants of aggregative democracy exist. under minimalism, democracy is a system of government in which citizens have given teams of political leaders the right to rule in periodic elections. according to this minimalist conception, citizens cannot and should not "rule" because, for example, on most issues, most of the time, they have no clear views or their views are not well-founded. joseph schumpeter articulated this view most famously in his book capitalism, socialism, and democracy. contemporary proponents of minimalism include william h. riker, adam przeworski, richard posner. according to the theory of direct democracy, on the other hand, citizens should vote directly, not through their representatives, on legislative proposals. proponents of direct democracy offer varied reasons to support this view. political activity can be valuable in itself, it socializes and educates citizens, and popular participation can check powerful elites. most importantly, citizens do not rule themselves unless they directly decide laws and policies. governments will tend to produce laws and policies that are close to the views of the median voter—with half to their left and the other half to their right. this is not a desirable outcome as it represents the action of self-interested and somewhat unaccountable political elites competing for votes. anthony downs suggests that ideological political parties are necessary to act as a mediating broker between individual and governments. downs laid out this view in his book an economic theory of democracy. robert a. dahl argues that the fundamental democratic principle is that, when it comes to binding collective decisions, each person in a political community is entitled to have his/her interests be given equal consideration (not necessarily that all people are equally satisfied by the collective decision). he uses the term polyarchy to refer to societies in which there exists a certain set of institutions and procedures which are perceived as leading to such democracy. first and foremost among these institutions is the regular occurrence of free and open elections which are used to select representatives who then manage all or most of the public policy of the society. however, these polyarchic procedures may not create a full democracy if, for example, poverty prevents political participation. similarly, ronald dworkin argues that "democracy is a substantive, not a merely procedural, ideal." deliberative democracy is based on the notion that democracy is government by deliberation. unlike aggregative democracy, deliberative democracy holds that, for a democratic decision to be legitimate, it must be preceded by authentic deliberation, not merely the aggregation of preferences that occurs in voting. authentic deliberation is deliberation among decision-makers that is free from distortions of unequal political power, such as power a decision-maker obtained through economic wealth or the support of interest groups. if the decision-makers cannot reach consensus after authentically deliberating on a proposal, then they vote on the proposal using a form of majority rule. radical democracy is based on the idea that there are hierarchical and oppressive power relations that exist in society. democracy's role is to make visible and challenge those relations by allowing for difference, dissent and antagonisms in decision-making processes. equality is a state of affairs in which all people within a specific society or isolated group have the same social status, especially socioeconomic status, including protection of human rights and dignity, and equal access to certain social goods and social services. furthermore, it may also include health equality, economic equality and other social securities. 

social equality requires the absence of legally enforced social class or caste boundaries and the absence of discrimination motivated by an inalienable part of a person's identity. to this end there must be equal justice under law, and equal opportunity regardless of, for example, sex, gender, ethnicity, age, sexual orientation, origin, caste or class, income or property, language, religion, convictions, opinions, health or disability. a common way of understanding politics is through the left–right political spectrum, which ranges from left-wing politics via centrism to right-wing politics. this classification is comparatively recent and dates from the french revolution, when those members of the national assembly who supported the republic, the common people and a secular society sat on the left and supporters of the monarchy, aristocratic privilege and the church sat on the right. today, the left is generally progressivist, seeking social progress in society. the more extreme elements of the left, named the far-left, tend to support revolutionary means for achieving this. this includes ideologies such as communism and marxism. the center-left, on the other hand, advocate for more reformist approaches, for example that of social democracy. in contrast, the right is generally motivated by conservatism, which seeks to conserve what it sees as the important elements of society. the far-right goes beyond this, and often represents a reactionary turn against progress, seeking to undo it. examples of such ideologies have included fascism and nazism. the center-right may be less clear-cut and more mixed in this regard, with neoconservatives supporting the spread of democracy, and one-nation conservatives more open to social welfare programs. according to norberto bobbio, one of the major exponents of this distinction, the left believes in attempting to eradicate social inequality—believing it to be unethical or unnatural, while the right regards most social inequality as the result of ineradicable natural inequalities, and sees attempts to enforce social equality as utopian or authoritarian. some ideologies, notably christian democracy, claim to combine left and right-wing politics; according to geoffrey k. roberts and patricia hogwood, "in terms of ideology, christian democracy has incorporated many of the views held by liberals, conservatives and socialists within a wider framework of moral and christian principles." movements which claim or formerly claimed to be above the left-right divide include fascist terza posizione economic politics in italy and peronism in argentina. political freedom (also known as political liberty or autonomy) is a central concept in political thought and one of the most important features of democratic societies. negative liberty has been described as freedom from oppression or coercion and unreasonable external constraints on action, often enacted through civil and political rights, while positive liberty is the absence of disabling conditions for an individual and the fulfillment of enabling conditions, e.g. economic compulsion, in a society. this capability approach to freedom requires economic, social and cultural rights in order to be realized. authoritarianism and libertarianism disagree the amount of individual freedom each person possesses in that society relative to the state. one author describes authoritarian political systems as those where "individual rights and goals are subjugated to group goals, expectations and conformities," while libertarians generally oppose the state and hold the individual as sovereign. in their purest form, libertarians are anarchists, who argue for the total abolition of the state, of political parties and of other political entities, while the purest authoritarians are, by definition, totalitarians who support state control over all aspects of society. for instance, classical liberalism (also known as laissez-faire liberalism) is a doctrine stressing individual freedom and limited government. this includes the importance of human rationality, individual property rights, free markets, natural rights, the protection of civil liberties, constitutional limitation of government, and individual freedom from restraint as exemplified in the writings of john locke, adam smith, david hume, david ricardo, voltaire, montesquieu and others. according to the libertarian institute for humane studies, "the libertarian, or 'classical liberal,' perspective is that individual well-being, prosperity, and social harmony are fostered by 'as much liberty as possible' and 'as little government as necessary.'" for anarchist political philosopher l. susan brown ( ), "liberalism and anarchism are two political philosophies that are fundamentally concerned with individual freedom yet differ from one another in very distinct ways. anarchism shares with liberalism a radical commitment to individual freedom while rejecting liberalism's competitive property relations." 